Bash up TMC workers, cops: BJP Bengal chief to party workers

West Bengal Bharatiya Janata Party (BJP) president Dilip Ghosh has once again stirred a row with his aggressive remarks. Addressing party men at an event in East Midnapore on Monday, Ghosh instructed BJP workers to beat up Trinamool Congress (TMC) workers and even police personnel if attacked.

Let me warn them, be it TMC leaders or their chamcha police officers, no one will be spared. Let me make it clear, if you do not hit back you will not be considered a BJP worker. Be it police or the TMC, bash them...I will deal with it, it is my responsibility, Ghosh told a gathering of BJP karyakartas in Mecheda.

Unleashing a scathing attack on the Trinammol Congress regime, Ghosh accused the police of booking opposition workers on trumped up charges. He said BJP workers can’t return to their homes for fear of TMC cadres and police torture.

We won’t tolerate such politics in Bengal. Twenty-eight thousand cases have been filed against our workers. We are spending crores to fight them. Hundreds are in jail on false cases, they have even booked me for a murder case! The day I start killing people we shall wipe off their entire generation. We haven’t killed anyone yet and we got 18 seats, Dilip Ghosh said.

The West Bengal BJP president went on to threaten police officers with transfers if the BJP won power in the state. We will transfer all the police officers after we come to power. No IPS or WBPS officers will be spared and no TMC leader will be able to save them, Dilip Ghosh said.

Continuing his threatening bluster he said BJP workers would strip policemen in the middle of the road. I am told a police officer has been transferred to Midnapore with the instruction to beat up BJP workers. The day I beat him up, they won’t find his corpse, his family won’t get to conduct his last rites, he said.

Taking suo moto cognizance of the comments, police in East Midnapore have booked the state BJP president. But despite another FIR, Ghosh remains unfazed and reiterated his position once again on Tuesday.

We feel that violence is required to combat this politics of violence or else we won’t survive. That’s why I have instructed our party men to not come to me weeping. They should take revenge instead. So far we have been opposing it through protests but now it’s time to retaliate, Ghosh told media persons in Kolkata.

Asked if his hate speech will further vitiate the deteriorating law and order situation in Bengal, the Dilip Ghosh said, It is not our responsibility. If the state government wants it to deteriorate then they must think about it. We have the right to life and we shall retaliate the way it is needed.

(With inputs from Tapas Ghosh in East Midnapore)
