Inducting Narayan Rane in BJP would be like adding salt to sweet milk, says Shiv Sena leader Deepak Kasarkar

Narayan Rane (file photo) | Photo Credit: PTI

Key Highlights Narayan Rane had earlier claimed that his induction into the BJP has been cleared by Amit Shah BJP has, however, yet not inducted Rane fearing a backlash from ally Shiv Sena

Mumbai: Prominent Maharashtra leader Narayan Rane's long wait to join the BJP may face yet another hurdle as ruling party's ally Shiv Sena has aired voices of dissent against the former Maharashtra chief minister's induction. Shiv Sena leader Deepak Kasarkar, on Tuesday, taunted that inducting Rane in BJP would be like adding salt in sweet milk. Kasarkar said that bringing Rane in the BJP is worthless as he has only one MLA left.

"Taking Narayan Rane in BJP will be equal to mixing salt in sweet milk, given how nice the relations between Uddhav and CM are right now," Kasarkar said.

"So far CM has taken good decisions and we hope he will continue to take good ones. What is the use of getting Rane in BJP, he has only 1 MLA left? In Congress also he didn't respect the leadership," he further added.

Last week, Rane had expressed impatience with the BJP for not inducting him into the party. Rane, a sitting Rajya Sabha MP, had said that he would be making a decision on dissolving his own party — Maharashtra Swabhiman Paksha (MSP) — in the next 10 days. He had reportedly claimed that BJP chief Amit Shah has already given a go-ahead for his induction into the party. "I am waiting for CM Devendra Fadnavis' response," he had claimed.

While Rane was elected as Rajya Sabha MP from BJP's Maharashtra quota, the party has yet not inducted him, reportedly fearing a backlash from its major ally Shiv Sena. The former Shiv Sena heavyweight was Maharashtra's CM for nine months in 1999 and quit the party in 2005 over differences with the then-executive president of Shiv Sena Uddhav Thackeray. Rane quit the Congress party in 2017 and formed his own party MSP.

Rane's son Nitesh is a Congress MLA and he had earlier claimed that in the forthcoming elections in Maharashtra, Nitesh would contest either on a BJP or MSP ticket.
