Karnataka Muslim Jamaat launched to forge the community into power bloc

Bengaluru, Jan 28: More than three years after launching Kerala Muslim Jamaat, veteran Sunni leader Kanthapuram A P Aboobacker Musliyar yesterday launched Karnataka Muslim Jamaat (KJM) in the presence of thousands of Muslims from across the state at Quddus (Qadria) Maidan on Millers Road in Bengaluru.

The Musliyar warned the political parties in Karnataka against ignoring the Muslim community which is now considered socially, educationally and economically backward.

The Sunni leader, however, distanced himself from politics saying that they would neither field candidates in polls, nor become a wing of any political outfit.

Amid loud cheering of Allahu Akbar, the leader said his group had taught political parties lessons several times in Kerala, and that it is capable of teaching lesson to political parties in Karnataka too.

Speaking on the occasion, Maulana Sayyid Noorani Mian Ashrafi, said that the 90 lakh strong Muslims of Karnataka should unitedly raise their voice for their rights. “Now we are awake. It’s high time we get united for our rights,” he said.

Convener of the convention, Shafi Saadi, said that the new outfit is an apolitical forum and it will press for political representation in proportion to the community’s population.

He claimed Muslims constitute 16% of the state’s population, but their representation in democratic bodies is negligible. On the other hand, other religious groups (Lingayats, Vokkaligas, Kurubas and Dalits) which are numerically far behind Muslims, are enjoying all the power and political patronage, he said.

“In terms of Muslims’ numerical strength, they should have at least five to six MPs and 37 to 40 MLAs,” Khader said, adding: “The present deplorable situation is mainly because of a lack of unity among Muslims. The KJM seeks to address this issue and ensure unity among Muslims to make them an important power bloc.”

A galaxy of political leaders cutting across parties including urban development minister U T Khader, former union minister C M Ibrahim, former Karnataka minister R Roshan Baig, JD(S) leader B M Farookh were present on the occasion.
