Ghatkopar-based woman duped of Rs 90k after calling ‘bank mobile number’

bank

Deonar

SBI

A Ghatkopar-based professional was duped of Rs 90,000 by a man who claimed to be an assistantbranch manager. In her complaint, Sumati Thusoo said she had found a cellphone number listed for thebranch of the State Bank of India, where she has an account, through a search on Google.The 29-year-old complainant told the police that the man who received her call on August 20 identified himself as Rahul Kumar. He allegedly promised to give her a SWIFT code needed to facilitate an international money transaction from her sister who lives in the United States. The accused allegedly sent the complainant an SMS, which he asked to forward him. "I sent this message to the number he asked to forward it to. He then asked me to add my UPI and the last four digits of my account number to activate a username for the SWIFT code. After providing him these details, I got a notification about some money being deducted from my account but he claimed it was just an update of the UPI," said Thusoo.Thusoo lodged a complaint with the Govandi police a day after the incident occurred. “I did as I was told,” she said. “He told me that the code will be sent to me in a while. The next message that I got from the bank, however, was a notification about Rs 90,000 being deducted from my account.”When she contacted the branch, she was told that there was no employee by that name at the office and that the contact number did not belong to the bank or any of its staff members. When she ran the number on caller identification phone app Truecaller, it revealed the registered owner as Bihar-based Sonu Khan.The police have booked the owner of the cellphone number under Sections 419 (cheating by impersonation) and 420 related to (cheating) under the Indian Penal Code. A police official said they are trying to trace the accused.Meanwhile, bank officials said they had initiated the process to report the fraudulent number as spam. “All our employees have reported the number as spam individually,” anofficial said. “We have also notified Google about the fraud via e-mail. Our head office has also been notified and we will get the number removed from the search engine.”The bank official also cautioned customers against sharing One Time Passwords with anyone, even if they claim to be bank employees. “If an account holder wants to contact us, they are better off using the landline numbers listed on the passbooks issued to them,” the bank official said.
