‘They say they'll capture Bengal too; I'll see how that happens’: Mamata issues warning to Modi govt

Mamata Banerjee warns Modi government | Photo Credit: ANI

Key Highlights Mamata warns Centre against any attempt to capture Bengal She alleges the country is headed towards a presidential form of government Mamata says the Central government is using brute force in Kashmir

Kolkata: West Bengal Chief Minister Mamata Banerjee on Wednesday launched a fresh attack on the Narendra Modi government at the Centre, expressing apprehension that the ruling party might be planning to “capture” West Bengal as well.

Apparently referring to the scrapping of Article 370 on Jammu and Kashmir, Mamata said she will see how they can capture Bengal. She also said that India appeared to be heading towards a presidential form of government and there will be no democracy left.

"The Central government is either threatening Opposition leaders or buying them out with money. It is after Bengal now, as we are opposing its policies and divisive politics," she added.

“One government, one leader, one party - I presume we're heading towards a presidential form of election. All other parties are being fragmented; when Karnataka government fell, no one said anything. They say they'll capture Bengal too, I'll see how that happens,” the Trinamool Congress chief said in Kolkata.

Mamata has slammed the Central government's recent decisions on Jammu and Kashmir, including the scrapping of Article 370 of the Constitution that granted special status to the state.

She today alleged that the Union government was employing brute force to suppress the voices of dissent in the Kashmir Valley.

"What is going on in Kashmir? The government is using brute force to scuffle all voices of dissent in the Valley," the CM said at a students’ rally.

Apparently referring to the CBI summon issued to TMC Arambagh MP Aparupa Poddar in connection with the Narada scam, Mamata said if she is put behind bars, she will see it as a ‘freedom struggle’.

“We are not scared of any agency, they will call one person today and another tomorrow. If I go to jail, I will look at it as a freedom struggle,” the chief minister said.

She dared the Central government to arrest her for raising her voice and said she "will not bow down before the BJP".

"All the institutions are headed by retired persons, who have no accountability. They are just following orders of the government like 'yes men'," the CM said.
