Motormouth Pak minister warns of India-Pakistan war in October

Sheikh Rashid was addressing the media in Rawalpindi and said that the "time had come for Kashmir's final freedom struggle". (Photo: Facebook/sheikhrasheedahmed12)

Pakistan's fish out of water act continues as it finds no international sympathisers for its Kashmir rhetoric.

After Pakistani PM Imran Khan's nuclear threat failed to evoke a reaction, a Pakistani minister has now predicted that a full-blown war between India and Pakistan is on the cards for the months of October and November.

Pakistan Federal Minister for Railways Sheikh Rashid Ahmed has on Wednesday predicted that a full-blown war between Pakistan and India will occur in October or November.

Rashid was addressing the media in Rawalpindi and said that the "time had come for Kashmir's final freedom struggle".

He emphatically declared that the imminent war with India "will be the last".

Sheikh Rashid also resorted to calling Indian Prime Minister Narendra Modi a "fascist and barbarian" and held him responsible for Kashmir's "destruction".

He went on to claim that Pakistan is the "only obstacle" before PM Modi.

"Kashmir is on the brink of destruction due to barbarian and fascist Narendra Modi, and Pakistan is the only obstacle in front of him. Why is the rest of the Muslim world silent over the issue?" Sheikh Rashid said.

He also said the United Nations was not serious about solving the Kashmir issue. "The United Nations Security Council (UNSC) would have held a plebiscite in Kashmir till now if it really wanted to solve the issue. We must stand with the people of the occupied Valley," the Pakistani minister added.

However, he said that PM Imran Khan will take the issue to the UN General Assembly again in September. Rashid said Pakistan is glad to have a friend like China backing it. "Imran Khan's speech at the United Nations on September 27 holds vital significance. We are lucky to have a friend like China standing with us."

During his address, Sheikh Rashid also dismissed the possibility of talks between India and Pakistan.

Rashid's finger-wagging came after Pakistan Prime Minister Imran Khan threatened nuclear war on Monday during an address to the nation.

Imran Khan, who was addressing Pakistan on the Kashmir situation, said that Pakistan will go to any extent on the issue.

Later, Pakistan's Federal Minister for Science and Technology Fawad Chaudhry also said that Prime Minister Imran Khan is contemplating the blocking land routes to impede Indian trade.

Amid heightening tensions between India and Pakistan over New Delhi's decision to revoke special status to Jammu and Kashmir, Islamabad has downgraded its diplomatic relations with India and partially closed its airspace.
