Parents of Woman Who Accused BJP's Chinmayanand of Harassment Fear for Her Safety

New Delhi: The parents of the woman who has accused former Bharatiya Janata Party Union minister Chinmayanand of threatening to kill her and her family, are fearful for her life. They were last in contact with her on August 24, a day after she posted a video accusing the BJP leader.

“We have no idea where she is, in what condition or if she is alive. She called on August 24 from some number unknown to us in Delhi and was extremely hassled. We could not even speak to her properly as she cut the phone within seconds,” the woman’s father told The Wire.

The woman is a student of Swami Shukdevanand Law College in Shahjahanpur where Chinmayanand is a director.

On Friday, the woman uploaded a video on Facebook in which she said, “A big leader of the saint society, who has destroyed the lives of several girls, has been threatening my life. I request Modiji and Yogiji to please help me. He has even threatened to kill my family. Only I know what I have been going through.” She further pleaded and said, “Modiji please help me, he is a sanyasi and is threatening that the police, DM and everyone else is on his side and no one can harm him. I request you all for justice.”

Also read: Law Student Goes Missing After Accusing Ex-Union Minister of Sexual Harassment

Subsequently, her father filed an abduction complaint with the police against Chinmayanand. “On the basis of a complaint filed by the victim’s father, we have registered a case against Swami Chinmayanand for alleged kidnapping, and threatening the victim’s family,” the director general of police (DGP) O.P. Singh told the Hindustan Times.

But her father said that the complaint was registered only after the case had widely been reported. “Initially, they did not file any complaint. They told us that you should know what you are saying and who you are filing a complaint against. They refused to file it. Then later after there was pressure, they filed the complaint.”

The father denies any knowledge of the woman’s whereabouts. “I have no idea. We have spoken to her friends and warden in the hostel, they also have no idea. The last time she called it was from a number in Delhi. But she had borrowed that phone only for a minute. Her phone number continues to be switched off,” he said.

Last year, the Adityanath government had decided to withdraw a rape and kidnapping case filed against Chinmayanand but could not, as the court had refused permission to do so.
