Security heightened at Gujarat ports, Intel warns of attack by Pak-trained commandos

Follow us on Image Source : FILE/PTI Security heightened at Kandla port in Gujarat after infiltration inputs

An alert has been sounded in Gujarat state and authorities directed to maintain tight security, including on ships berthed at Kandla port, in the wake of intelligence inputs warning of Pakistan-trained commandoes trained in underwater attacks having entered the Gulf of Kutch area.

Additionally, Adani Ports said it has increased security measures at its Mundra port in Kutch district and asked all stakeholders such as shipping agents and vessel operators to remain alert in view of intelligence inputs of a possible infiltration by terrorists through the sea route.

The Mundra port, run by the Adani group, is one of the largest ports in the country and last year topped the rankings in volume terms.

The Port Trust authorities, in a message, said the Pak-trained commandos are believed to have entered the Gulf of Kutch through the Harami Nala Creek Area.

The message said: "It is therefore directed to take utmost measures of security and prevent any untoward situation in Gujarat state, all ships at DPT (Deendayal Port Trust) to take utmost security measures and maintain anti-terror watch, and be alert."

Signed by the Signal Superintendent of Deendayal Port Trust, formerly known as Kandla Port Trust, in Kutch, the message also directed all shipping authorities to inform their vessels berthed at Kandla and those expected to enter the port to remain alert and "maintain terror watch" and report any suspicious activity to the nearest coast guard station, marine police station and the port control.

It directed the Kandla Port Steamship Agents Association (KPSAA) to forward the message to all, including trade associations with liquid storage facilities, the Customs House Agents Association, the stevedors, barge operators and others.

It also directed Netherlands-based Van Oord, which has a contract to maintain Kandla port, to alert all dredgers and support craft in the channel and "maintain sharp watch and report any suspicious activity" to the port control.

Adani Ports said it has issued an advisory directing all shipping agents and stakeholders to inform their vessels accordingly and report any suspicious activity to marine control station and port operation centre immediately.

"Reliable inputs are received from Indian Coast Guard that Pakistan trained commandos are likely to infiltrate into Indian territory through Kutch area preferably via sea route to create communal disturbance or terrorist attack in Gujarat," the company said in a security advisory to shipping agents and stakeholders.

All stakeholders are requested to institute preventive measures to mitigate hostile attacks and assume highest state of readiness and be vigilant towards any attempts to breach the coastal security, the company said.

"Any suspicious activities by individuals/ vessels/ crafts/ boats approaching towards the coast are to be tracked continuously and information to be disseminated to all concerned," the advisory said.

"Mundra port is maintaining ISPS security level 1. Security measures have also been enhanced on the shore side of the port. All are requested to cooperate accordingly," it said.

The alert comes in the wake of heightened tensions between India and Pakistan over Kashmir after New Delhi abrogated Article 370 of the Constitution, which Islamabad has termed an act of "annexation". India has upped its security in the wake of warmongering statements being made by Pakistani leaders over Kashmir.

(with inputs from agencies)

ALSO READ | HIGH ALERT in Rajasthan after reports of terrorists' entry; security tightened at Jaipur Airport

ALSO READ | Tamil Nadu on HIGH ALERT: 6 Lashkar terrorists have entered state through Sri Lanka, intel report says

ALSO READ | Amid high security alert, mysterious explosion at Tamil Nadu temple kills one, injures four

Latest India News
