Was born Muslim, am proud Indian first: Dinesh Gundu Rao's wife takes on Anant Kumar Hegde

Tabu Rao reacted sharply to "misogynistic" and "provocative" remarks made by Union minister Anant Kumar Hegde, who said Karnataka Congress chief Dinesh Gundu Rao was a "guy who ran behind a Muslim lady". Tabu Rao is Dinesh Gundu Rao's wife.

In a Facebook post, Tabu Rao said she seemed to have beome a "soft target" for Bharatiya Janata Party leaders who are "unable to politically take on" her husband. Tabu Rao said that Anant Kumar Hegde had dragged her "into political slugfest" even though she is a "private person" who does not hold any party pr public position.

Directly responding to Anant Kumar Hegde's 'I only know him [Dinesh Rao] as a guy who ran behind a Muslim lady' comment, Tabu Rao said, "Yes, I was born a Muslim, but we are proud Indians first. The Constitution of India which is built on the foundation of secularism guarantees every individual 'Liberty of thought, expression, belief, faith and worship'."

Tabu Rao said she "resents" Hegde using her as a "pawn" in "cheap politics". "If they [BJP leaders] have the courage, they should challenge my husband politically instead of hiding behind a housewife's saree and throwing stones," Tabu Rao said. "Such misogynistic and provocative remarks are highly unbecoming of a union Minister."

Tabu Rao also claimed that Anant Kumar Hegde blocked her on Twitter after she tried to "engage" with him. "Karnataka politicians are generally known for their maturity and dignity. I would urge Mr Hegde and his colleagues not to sully the image of our state through their vitriolic statements and demeaning remarks against women," Tabu Rao said in her Facebook post.

Tabu Rao's Facebook post followed Union minister Anant Kumar Hegde reaching a new low in public discourse.

This weekend, Anant Kumar Hegde, while addressing a large crowd in Karnataka's Kodagu, said, "We have to rethink the priorities of our society. We shouldn't think of caste.If a Hindu girl is touched by a hand, then that hand should not exist."

Karnataka Congress chief Dinesh Gundu Rao called out Anant Kumar Hegde for his comment this morning. In a tweet, Dinesh Gundu Rao questioned what Anant Kumar Hegde had achieved after becoming a Union minister and what he had done for Karnataka's development.

In response, Anant Kumar Hegde tweeted, "I shall definitely answer this guy [Dinesh Gundu Rao's] queries, before which could he please reveal himself as to who he is along with his achievements? I only know him as a guy who ran behind a Muslim lady."

I shall definitely answer this guy @dineshgrao's queries, before which could he please reveal himself as to who he is along with his achievements?

I only know him as a guy who ran behind a Muslim lady. https://t.co/8hVJ2wQXMU Anantkumar Hegde (@AnantkumarH) January 27, 2019

Congress chief Rahul Gandhi reacted to the comment, calling Anant Kumar Hegde "an embarrassment to every Indian". "He's unfit to be a Union Minister and deserves to be sacked," Rahul Gandhi said in a tweet.

This man is an embarrassment to every Indian. He's unfit to be a Union Minister and deserves to be sacked. https://t.co/SbrvEdQBur Rahul Gandhi (@RahulGandhi) January 28, 2019

Anant Kumar Hegde's statement was also slammed by Dinesh Gundu Rao who said he was "sad" to see Anant Kumar Hegde "stoop to such low levels".

"Guess it's his lack of culture."
