Half a BILLION bees mysteriously die in Brazil in just three months as experts warn of catastrophic consequences for the world

HALF a billion bees have mysteriously died in Brazil in just three months as experts warn of catastrophic consequences for the world's food chain.

Worried hive keepers in four states across the South American country have reported swarms of insects dying out in vast numbers.

3 Hundreds of millions of bees have mysteriously been dying off in Brazil (stock) Credit: Getty Images - Getty

In the southern state of Rio Grande do Sul it's estimated more than 400 million bees have suddenly been killed off, reports the Mirror.

The speed and scale of the die-offs was at first feared to be colony collapse disorder - an illness that began decimating bees across North America and Europe in 2006.

However where that causes worker bees to abandon their hives, the bees in Brazil are dropping dead on the spot.

Although the exact cause of the mass buzz kill is still unknown, many researchers believe widespread pesticide use in the country is to blame.

Bees are particularly vulnerable to chemicals containing neonicotinoids, fipronil and other toxins already banned in Europe.

Last year, President Jair Bolsonaro lifted a long-term ban of the pesticides in Brazil and within months the bees started to die out.

Environmentalists are quick to point out the death of so many crop pollinating bees could have a devastating impact on food supplies.

One-third of the food we eat on Earth is reliant on pollination - mainly by bees.

They carry pollen from the male part of a plant to the female part of a plant, allowing the production of seeds.

However, if too many bees die, not only will we lose the plants they pollinate, but also the animals that eat them.

Other mass bee deaths have also bee reported in Canada, Mexico, Argentina and Turkey over the last 18 months.

3

3 Researchers fear pesticides - banned in the EU - may be to blame for the deaths Credit: Getty - Contributor
