Upset over Congress leaders’ statements, Karnataka CM Kumaraswamy threatens to quit

After receiving a show-cause notice, Congress MLA Somashekhar apologises for his statement critical of the coalition government.

Karnataka’s ruling coalition of the Janata Dal (Secular) and the Congress, which has barely recovered from recent alleged attempts by the Opposition BJP to poach Congress MLAs, was plunged into yet another crisis on Monday as Chief Minister H.D. Kumaraswamy said he was ready to step down in response to repeated attempts to undermine his role in the coalition by loyalists of former Chief Minister and Congress leader Siddaramaiah.

The crisis, which sent senior Congress leaders scrambling to defuse the situation, was sparked off by four Congress MLAs, including a Cabinet Minister, publicly declaring on Sunday that for them, Mr. Siddaramaiah was still the Chief Minister.

‘No development’

Yeshwanthpur MLA S.T. Somashekar, newly appointed as Chairperson of the Bangalore Development Authority, went so far as to say the capital city had not seen any development during the past seven months of the coalition government.

An emotional Mr. Kumaraswamy, in the midst his pre-budget meeting schedule on Monday, told reporters in Bengaluru that he was willing to quit. “If my style of functioning is not acceptable to anybody, I am ready to quit. I do not want to continue and stick on to the chair. Congress and JD(S) leaders have formed this government to give good governance,” he said. Putting the onus on the Congress leadership to resolve these issues, he said, “It is left to them. I am not the person concerned. If they want to continue with the same things, I am ready to step down. ”

Congress leaders act

Seeking to limit the damage from Mr. Kumaraswamy’s outburst, Mr. Siddaramaiah told reporters in Mysuru that he would speak to the Chief Minister, stressing that there was no question of his becoming Chief Minister.

With KPCC president Dinesh Gundu Rao also saying Mr. Somashekar had crossed the line in coalition politics, the latter issued an apology in the afternoon, expressing regret for any anguish caused to the Chief Minister.

Scrambling to limit the damage, AICC Organising Secretary and in charge of Karnataka K.C. Venugopal said the Congress high command had full faith in Karnataka government and Chief Minister. He also instructed KPCC to issue show cause notice to Mr. Somashekar, seeking an explanation for his controversial remarks.

“If the explanation is not satisfactory, party will take strong disciplinary action. The Congress will not tolerate any such indisciplined statements and actions,” he tweeted.

Coalition dharma

KPCC president Dinesh Gundu Rao said Mr. Somashekar had crossed the line of coalition politics, especially when he is holding a responsible position.

”It’s an act of indiscipline and action will be initiated. Our coalition with the JD(S) is to take on the communal forces and unseat the anti- democratic forces ruling this country, not to indulge in petty politicking,” he tweeted.

By late afternoon, Mr. Somashekar reached the KPCC office and offered an unconditional apology for his remarks. Mr. Rao also tweeted later asking party legislators and ministers not to speak against the government and violate coalition dharma. “Problems, if any, can be discussed in party forum,” he said.

Meanwhile, the BJP jumped into the fray and used the Chief Minister's remarks to deny allegations that it was trying to topple the government by poaching coalition MLAs.

“The Chief Minister's statement exposes the internal bickering between coalition partners. It has also proved that allegation of Operation Lotus is a bogus claim by the Chief Minister and other Congress leaders to divert people's attention from the government's failures,” Leader of the Opposition and BJP State president B.S. Yeddyurappa said.
