Madhya Pradesh milieu: Scindia camp threatens to tender mass resignations if he’s not made MP Congress chief

Congress leader Jyotiraditya Scindia. | Photo Credit: PTI

Key Highlights Madhya Pradesh Chief Minister Kamal Nath met interim Congress president and UPA chairperson Sonia Gandhi in New Delhi to discuss various party agendas Scindia, however, declined to comment on the resignation threats

Bhopal: Trouble continues to mount for the Congress party post the humiliating electoral drubbing they received at the hands of the voters in the 2019 Lok Sabha elections. While several of its leaders quit the party and switched allegiances to join the ruling Bharatiya Janata Party at the Centre, others have expressed unrest and displeasure within the party ranks, showing a clear picture of power tussle among the cadre.

Madhya Pradesh Congress Committee is the latest to face brewing dissent among its members after Chief Minister Kamal Nath resigned from the post of state party president. Though he lost his home constituency of Guna, Congress leader Jyotiraditya Scindia commands strong political sway even today, a classic example of it being the threats of mass resignation sent forth by his supporters if he is not made the state Congress chief.

Congress leaders in the state have issued a statement saying that if Scindia is not made the state unit chief, they would tender mass resignations. “The party workers who have threatened to resign they have the right to put forward their thoughts within the party. Under the same rights, I would also like to say that Scindia ji should be made the Madhya Pradesh Congress Committee chief by the high command. We request Sonia ji and Rahul ji to do the same. If this is not done, then I, along with other senior office bearers in the state, will tender our resignations,” a Congress leader from the state told Times Now.

“If Jyotiraditya Scindia is kept away from state politics then I, along with 500 others, will resign from the party,” Congress leader Ashok Dangi from Datia said in a press note.

Congress leader Ashok Dangi from Datia, Madhya Pradesh has issued a press note saying, "if Jyotiraditya Scindia is kept away from state politics then he (Dangi) along with 500 people will resign from the party." pic.twitter.com/n83LKXTmfm — ANI (@ANI) August 30, 2019

Meanwhile, Kamal Nath met interim Congress president and UPA chairperson Sonia Gandhi in New Delhi to discuss various party agendas. “I met Sonia Gandhi ji and discussed various subjects, including the party organisation in Madhya Pradesh. It was a very fruitful discussion like always,” Nath told media persons after the meeting.

Madhya Pradesh Chief Minister Kamal Nath after meeting Sonia Gandhi in Delhi: I met Sonia Gandhi ji today & we discussed various subjects, including party organisation in the state. It was a very fruitful discussion like always pic.twitter.com/vgLVm7542y — ANI (@ANI) August 30, 2019

Scindia, however, declined to comment on the resignation threats.
