Security Beefed Up At Kandla, Mundra Ports In Gujarat Over Terror Threat Via Sea Route

Security has been beefed up at important ports in Gujarat and other vital installations in the coastal region after intelligence inputs of possible terrorist infiltrations through the sea route, police said on Thursday, August 29.

The preventive measure comes amidst the existing tensions with Pakistan following the abrogation of Article 370 in Jammu and Kashmir by the central government. Patrolling at Kandla and Mundra ports in Gujarat has been intensified following the intel inputs that the terrorists may spread communal violence or launch a terror attack.

A security advisory issued by the ports read, “Pakistan trained commandos are believed to be trained with underwater attacks”, directing ports to maintain strict security arrangements and anti-terror watch.

Mundra and Kandla ports located in the Gulf of Kutch in the Arabian Sea and are of strategic importance to India. The Kandla port houses a large bulk cargo handling facility while Mundra port houses a liquefied natural gas import terminal and a bulk and container cargo handling facility operated by the Adani Group.

It suggested preventative measures, including an additional deployment of security personnel, combat patrolling in the coastal region and intercepting any suspicious vessel approaching towards the coast.

The security advisory directed authorities to ensure “zero tolerance for unidentified suspicious activities” as well as restrict the entry of unauthorised personnel. Thorough checking of all vehicular movement near the port premises was also to be monitored.

The security measures were beefed up days after the Indian Navy warned of a possible terror attack from the seaside.

“We receive inputs about possible terrorist infiltrations from time to time, and we have enhanced the security at all vital installations in Kutch district, including the Kandla port,” Inspector General of Police (border range) D B Vaghela said.

Also Read: Article 370 Deterred Development In J&K? Statistics Prove State To Be Better Than Many Others
