Supporter threatens to quit Cong if Scindia not appointed MP chief

BHOPAL: With appointment of the next state Congress president expected soon, followers of the Jyotiraditya Scindia camp have threatened mass resignation if the party top leadership does not give him command of the government and organization in Madhya Pradesh. In a statement to the media, Congress’ Datia district working president Ashok Dangi Bagda on Friday said, “If Scindia is kept away from Madhya Pradesh politics, then I will resign from Congress party with 500 workers.”On August 22, AICC interim president Sonia Gandhi appointed Jyotiraditya Scindia as chairman of the Screening Committee for the upcoming assembly election in Maharashtra. Scindia followers openly said they “did not like” this decision of sending him to Maharashtra when he could have been given responsibility in the state.Earlier this week, minister for women and child development Imarti Devi grabbed headlines when she said, “What responsibility? If responsibility had to be given, it should be in Madhya Pradesh. Who is bothered about what is happening there (Maharashtra)?”On Friday, Ashoke Dangi Bagda, also a member of the Datia District Panchayat argued that in the state Congress if there is “a charismatic leader”, then it is Jyotiraditya Scindia. “His contribution towards formation of the government in the state should not be forgotten by top leadership. There are some leaders in the state Congress who cannot digest Shrimant (title used to address Gwalior royal family members) Scindia’s leadership qualities and popularity. That is why, some conspirators are purposely trying to distance a charismatic leader from the state, which cannot be tolerated.”The Congress leader from Datia threatened, “If he (Scindia) is kept away, then we the dedicated Scindia follower Congress workers will first go to 10, Janpadh and protest. And if the high-command, does not change its decision, then 500 office-bearers and workers will submit mass resignation to AICC president Sonia Gandhi, Rahul Gandhi, national general secretary Priyanka Gandhi and PCC chief Kamal Nath.”Bagda demanded the party top leadership “to reconsider its decision and instead of sending the inspiration Shrimant Scindia to Maharashtra, give him the command of the government and organization in Madhya Pradesh.”Supporters of Scindia also protested in front of the state PCC office on Friday. They claimed that youth wanted Scindia as chief minister but the Congress leader’s contribution was not recognized when the party formed government in December last year. Raising slogans they demanded that Scindia be appointed state president of the Congress.
