South Asia Daily: A slab of irony, rolled in batter of absurdity and deep-fried in paradox

Take a giant slab of irony, roll it in batter of absurdity and then deep-fry it in a cauldron of paradox. What you get is the latest development in Afghanistan.

While on the face of it the agreement between the United States and the Taliban over a draft peace framework is a welcome development, it cannot fully cover the irony-absurdity-paradox that I just pointed out.

Essentially what this means is that nearly 18 years after the US invasion drove the Taliban out of Kabul and vicinity because it harbored the 9/11 masterminds, Washington has now engaged the same Taliban, albeit a mutation of it, in peace talks. One of the primary conditions of the draft peace agreement is that the Taliban guarantee it will never allow terrorist groups to operate from its soil.

Let me quickly add to complete the irony-absurdity-paradox picture that only a short time ago Russia was suspected of helping the Taliban. You have to consider that suspicion among some quarters in Washington against the backdrop of the Soviet Union, the earlier avatar of Russia, having invaded Afghanistan in 1979 and being beaten back by the same Taliban with US help in 1989. If your head is spinning, I do not blame you.

The New York Times and others report that as part of the draft peace agreement the US will pull out of Afghanistan conditioned upon the Taliban agreeing to a ceasefire as well direct talks with the Afghan government. It has taken nine years for the parties to come to this stage and it is commendable in a broad sense.

However, Afghanistan has a long and undistinguished history of having flattered to deceive the great powers that be. Also, the Taliban is not necessarily a cohesive, monolithic organization which speaks in one voice. The fact that Mullah Abdul Ghani Baradar, a powerful member of the original Taliban, is the chief peace negotiator from their side is somewhat reassuring but the prospects of peace have to be taken with much salt.

The idea that the Taliban would guarantee that Afghanistan does not become a staging ground for terrorists is not wholly reassuring. It is like asking the arsonist to ensure there is no fire, which may work in some sense if the arsonist has enough stake not to burn things down.

From the looks of it, the government of President Ashraf Ghani seems like an incidental player to the talks so far. As it is, the Ghani government’s writ is not said to run too far outside Kabul but at least symbolically he is the man in-charge in the capital and that counts for something. I am sure Ghani is worried about how the US-Taliban engagement may work out for him even though Washington insists that the Taliban must engage with him before it begins any troop pullout.

On a separate note, India must be watching this particular development with some concern because of its deep antipathies towards the Taliban. If the Taliban does return in some consequential way to Kabul, New Delhi will have no choice but to work with it, having already invested over three billion dollars in development aid. Coming as the development does barely months before India will hold its next general election, it is a tricky one for the Narendra Modi government.
