Islamist parties stage demo to support Kashmiris

Activists and leaders of several Islamist parties bring out a procession from Baitul Mukarrum National Mosque after the Jumma prayers, protesting the abrogation of the special status of Jammu and Kashmir by the Indian government on Friday, August 30, 2019 Dhaka Tribune

They have urged the people of Bangladesh to stand beside Kashmir people

A platform of different Islamist parties has staged a procession in Dhaka expressing concern over the abrogation of the special status of Jammu and Kashmir by the Indian regime.

They also urged the people and government of Bangladesh to stand by them.

Under the banner of "All Parties for Kashmir Solidarity, Bangladesh", hundreds of protesters formed a rally followed by a procession that paraded different roads after Jumma prayers at the Baitul Mukarran national mosque on Friday.

They said that instead of granting independence to Muslim-dominated Kashmir, India has now decided to abolish the existing autonomy of Kashmir. "It is a violation of human rights," they said urging all to stage protests demanding the independence of Kashmir.

The procession, carrying placards with slogans-- ‘stand up for Kashmir, Give back Kashmir’s autonomy, stop killing Muslims in Kashmir, whose new Kashmir is this anyway etc, was started from the mosque and ended at the Doel Chattar (Nightingale intersection).

Addressing the procession, Abdur Rab Yousufi, vice president of Jamiat Ulema-e Islam Bangladesh, said that Kashmir’s people have been facing oppression for many years and the rest of the world does not have the full picture of it.

Muslims fought for around 200 years for the independence of India to end the British rule, but in the independent India they did not get their rights. "If the oppression against Muslim does not end, they will fight again," he said.

Nur Hossain Kasemi, vice-president of Hefajat-e-Islam, said that on 13 August 1948, Nehru proposed at the United Nations that the people of Kashmir would decide their fate themselves. Pakistan and India would withdraw their forces and a referendum would be done under the supervision of the United Nations. But that did not happen.

He said that article 370 proves that Kashmir is not a part of India. Kashmir was independent and the people were in support of independence. They have been struggling for independence falling victim to a conspiracy for more than 70 years.

“Our solidarity forum is proclaiming unity with the people of Kashmir. We shall pray for Kashmir’s independence and also be ready for all sorts of cooperation,” he added.

The Indian government stripped Jammu and Kashmir of its semi-autonomy and statehood, creating two federal territories on August 5.

The order revoked Article 370 of India's constitution, which gave the state of Jammu and Kashmir its own constitution and decision-making rights for all matters except for defense, communications and foreign affairs.

The article also forbid Indians outside the state from permanently settling, buying land, holding local government jobs and securing educational scholarships.
