Congress in damage control as Kumaraswamy threatens to quit

An open endorsement of Congress Legislature Party leader Siddaramaiah as a "better" chief minister by a few party MLAs led to Karnataka Chief Minister H.D. Kumaraswamy threatening to step down on Monday. The JD(S) leader offered to resign as chief minister “if the Congress legislators were not in favour of him leading the government”.

However, the Congress leadership jumped to save the situation and sent out a stern warning to its legislators.

"If the Congressmen want to continue saying the same thing, I am ready to step down," said an emotionally charged Kumaraswamy.

On Sunday, Yeshwantpur MLA and Bengaluru Development Authority (BDA) chairman S.T. Somashekhar, while addressing a public gathering, said that no development work was carried out in Bengaluru in the last seven months. "In Siddaramaiah's tenure, a lot of development work had taken place. So, people still consider him as the CM," said Somashekhar.

Earlier, Congress leaders and sitting ministers C. Puttarangashetty and M.T.B. Nagaraj hailed Siddaramaiah as the best chief minister and as the one who chose to empower leaders from the backward classes.

Chikkaballapur MLA Sudhakar had compared Siddaramaiah to the "Dharmaraja" of the Mahabharata, who was defeated by deceit. "But truth will finally triumph and Siddaramaiah will once again become the chief minister,” he said.

Wary of the constant outburst of the Congress legislators against the coalition government, the JD(S) warned of consequences and even went on to claim that the 20-month rule of the JD(S)-BJP coalition in 2006 was much better than the current coalition with the Congress.

Irked by the statements coming out of the Congress camp, JD(S) leader and minor irrigation minister C.S. Puttaraju warned the ruling partner against violating the rules of the coalition. "Senior Congress leaders should intervene and control their party members making unsavoury remarks against the coalition. The Congress may have to face the consequences of its behaviour," warned Puttaraju.

“The Congress leaders should understand that we did not go to anybody's doorstep. It was Congress which approached our leader Deve Gowda to keep the BJP out of power. Why does the Congress forget this? They have hurt the chief minister," added Puttaraju.

Rattled by the developments, AICC general secretary K.C. Venugopal immediately directed the party to take disciplinary action against Somashekhar.

Venugopal tweeted: "The Congress High Command has full faith in Karnataka government and the chief minister. The government is moving ahead with popular and welfare measures reflecting the ambitions of the people in Karnataka."

In another tweet, Venugopal warned that any act of indiscipline by way of comments or behaviour will not be tolerated and that the disciplinary action will be initiated.

"Our coalition with the JD(S) is to take on the communal forces and unseat the anti-democratic forces ruling this country, not to indulge in petty politicking," Venugopal said.

KPCC chief Dinesh Gundu Rao also condemned the MLA's remarks saying, "It is an objectionable statement. It is also an act of indiscipline. It is not right to say no work is happening during this government. Mega projects worth Rs 8,000 crore are being carried out in the city. Somashekhar is the BDA chairman and he should raise his concerns in the party forum. I will be issuing a show cause notice to him. We are happy with Kumaraswamy's leadership."

Siddaramaiah tried to downplay the incident saying, "I will speak to Kumaraswamy. We have formed the coalition. There is no confusion. There is no question of me becoming the CM now."

Deputy Chief Minister G. Parameshwara said, "Siddaramaiah was one of the best CMs and has done well for the last five years. No one can dispute that. He is now the CLP leader. What the MLA perhaps meant was that he still considers Siddaramaiah as his chief minister."

JD(S) MLC Basavaraj Horatti claimed that lack of coordination would make it difficult for the chief minister to table the upcoming budget.

Exuding confidence in Kumaraswamy's leadership, Congress MLA Satish Jarkiholi said, "He has the experience of being part of a coalition. He will run this coalition effectively.”

“The coalition will naturally have a little friction. It can be sorted out in coordination committee or joint legislature party meeting," he said.
