Pilibhit child lifting rumours: 4 cops injured after being thrashed by villagers, 10 arrested

At least four cops who were investigating a child lifting report sustained injuries in a clash with villagers in Pilibhit district of Uttar Pradesh. Several rounds were also fired in the air from both sides. Police have arrested at least 10 people including the village pradhan and raids are being conducted to arrest others.

According to Pilibhit police, the incident took place in Sondha village on Friday night when dial 100 team was called over reports of child lifting. After investigating the case, the police found that a false complaint was made by the villagers. The cops started reprimanding the villagers and warned them against indulging in rumour-mongering.

The villagers got angry and attacked the dial 100 team. An additional force from the local police station also arrived in the village. Clashes broke out between the cops and mob. Some people also fired in the air to disperse the cops but police used force to nab them.

The senior police officers including the superintendent of police (SP) arrived at the spot to control the situation.

Speaking to media, SP Pilibhit Manoj Sonkar said, "When the police told the villagers that action will be taken against spreading rumours of child lifting, the villagers got angry and attacked the cops with lathis. They also fired several rounds in the air. Extra police force reached the village after getting information about clashes to control the situation. We have arrested 10 people from the spot including the village pradhan. Four cops have sustained injuries in the violence."

At least 80 people have been named in the FIR. An investigation is underway to identify them. Raids are also being conducted in different locations to arrest the perpetrators. Most of the people have fled the village, fearing arrest by the police.

Meanwhile, a Delhi Police team which arrived at a village in Bareilly on Friday in plain clothes for investigating a case was confronted by a group of people after they mistook them for child-lifters. However, the local cops came to their rescue on time and the team was safely escorted out of the village.
