Kerala: Archbishop of Canterbury cautions about climate change

KOTTAYAM: Archbishop of Canterbury Justin Welby who is on his first official visit to India raised the issue of dealing climate change. Addressing an ecumenical meeting organised by the Church of South India (CSI) here on Saturday, the Archbishop said that the climate change that began in the richest countries of the world has now turned to countries like India which are building up their economy. He also said that it is for the rich to bear the burden of dealing with issue of climate change and not the poor. “But it is a burden for every human being, he said. "Someone in South Pacific told me a year ago that in Europe climate change is an academic subject while in the South Pacific it is life and death," he said.“We are living in a hard world. People are suffering from poverty, climate change, from all sorts of pain and sufferings which are part of human conditions or sometimes caused by natural disaster or by other human beings, war and diseases. When there are storms, cyclones and floodings it is the poor who suffer most, he said.He also recounted his experience during a visit on Thursday to a church in Colombo in Sri Lanka where one of the bomb had exploded on Easter Sunday. “There I saw some of the victims of the bombings. Church was full. They were not terrified. They trusted in Christ. There were many children in the church. Still with scars and marks of the bombing. Still with the trauma of their suffering. And yet they came forward. It inspired me for the future,” he said.He also Lauded CSI church for beginning women’s education in Kottayam 200 years ago. “200 years of women’s education, much yet to do. CSI church have shown an example and I am grateful to god for your example,” he said.“My visit is prayful, pastoral and pilgrimage. On this trip I will have the privilege to travel across India. Starting from Kerala , Bengaluru, Hyderabad, Jabalpur, Kolkata, and finally to Amritsar,” he said.Joseph Mat Thoma Metropolitan, Cardinal George Alencherry, Cardinal Moran Mor Baselios Cleemis, Mar Aprem Mooken Metropolitan, Kuriakose Mor Severios, Yuhanon Mar Chrysostomos Metropolitan, Bishop A Dhramaraj Rasalam, C Robert Bruce and Bishop Emeritus Thomas Samuel delivered benedictory address on the occasion.Earlier, the Archbishop and wife Caroline were welcomed by the CSI moderator Bishop Thomas K Oommen at the entrance of Baker Grounds where the meeting was held.On Sunday morning he will lead the holy mass at the CSI cathedral here. Following this he will conduct inaugural service at the new chapel in the Bishop's house. He will leave for Kavalam in Alappuzha district by boat around 1pm. He will interact with local people at the CSI church in Kavalam.On September 2, he will be the chief guest of the valedictory of the bicentenary celebrations of CMS college held in the campus at 10.30am. He will later visit Jerusalem Marthoma church before leaving for Bengaluru.
