Off the list, villagers in mad dash rue ‘wasted’ sacrifice

GUWAHATI: Zarina Khatun was forced to sell a pair of cows in July to hire a vehicle to go from one end of Assam to the other for an NRC hearing that had been convened at short notice.On Sunday, her forehead creased with worry after finding her name missing from the final NRC, the homemaker from Sontoli in Kamrup (rural) district wondered how she would pay for the long legal battle that lies ahead. “I was hopeful of getting into the NRC after the re-verification hearing. I believed that the officials I met would understand my plight and include me in the final list. When my brothers and sisters, who have used the same legacy data as me are in the list, how can I be a foreigner? All my efforts have gone to vain,” she told TOI.Between 300 and 400 residents of Goroimari Bilorjan village had received summons just days before the re-verification hearings, most of them in places hundreds of kilometres away. Almost all of them spent more than they could afford to travel overnight in hired vehicles so that they wouldn’t miss the hearings.In their desperation, some sold their valuables while those who didn’t have any put their cattle in market. Zarina feels that she and many others in her village are victims of the “perception” that the Sontoli area is the hub of illegal migrants from Bangladesh. Her neighbour Rahima Khatun, who had travelled around 365km to attend an NRC hearing in Upper Assam’s Golaghat district, was confident of making it to the list because the names of her two brothers figured in the draft NRC published in July last year.“I had all the documents, yet I didn’t make it to either of the two draft NRCs or the final one,” said Rahima, who runs a tailoring shop.“August 31has changed everything for us. Where will my family get the money to hire a lawyer to fight my case? We are completely dependent on the income from my tailoring shop. Either we have to sell our land or our cattle. We don’t have any savings.”According to a rough estimate, those who failed to make it to the final NRC might have to spend up to Rs 50,000 on legal and other fees if they appeal for re-verification by a foreigners’ tribunal. For many villagers of Sontoli who own “ancestral land” with records dating back to the British era, the fear of losing their homesteads now weighs on their minds as much as the burden of living each day as perceived foreigners.
