Beware, raw milk can infect you with brucellosis!

VADODARA/ ANAND: There is a word of caution for all those buying daily milk quota from livestock rearers. Consuming unpasteurized or raw milk may transmit brucellosis into you.Brucellosis is a chronic bacterial disease endemic in India which affects bovines and other livestock. The increased demand for dairy products and expansion of farming has raised concern about its spread and transmission to humans as well.In fact, since 2017, as many as 250 people including farmers, veterinarians, those involved in animal husbandry or handling livestock took ill with brucellosis in Gujarat of which 70 required treatment due to severe symptoms. The cases were reported from Bhuj and Khirsara in Kutch, Bidaj near Ahmedabad, Ode in Anand and Sabarkantha.In extreme cases, the disease can lead to abortion in the cows or buffaloes.This is the first time that cases of human brucellosis have been identified, reported and treated in Gujarat. This, thanks to a pilot project on brucellosis control which had initiated jointly by NDDB, Amul and Shree Krishna Hospital at Karamsad which is facilitating the process of identifying farmers with the disease, creating awareness on the zoonotic aspects and providing treatment.A report published by the National Institute of Veterinary, Epidemiology and Disease Informatics, prevalence of brucellosis in cows and buffaloes of the country is around 22.2 %. “India has the largest bovine population in the world at 30 crore of which nearly 60 lakh cows and buffaloes suffer from brucellosis,” said an official from Anand-headquartered National Dairy Development Board (NDDB), the apex body for dairy development in the country,“If the animal is infected, the bacteria remains in its body throughout its life. Its raw milk will also contain lots of bacteria,” said an NDDB scientist.To protect animals from getting infected, vaccination is done once in their life cycle. Even after vaccination, if the animal remains exposed to very heavy doses of bacteria, it will again start suffering from the disease.“NDDB’s model of brucella control focuses on reducing the chances of disease spread by using an effective tool box which includes many other components besides vaccination of female calves between 4-8 months of age and incorporating the ‘one health’ approach which includes the human aspect. This approach of connecting the disease in animals with the occurrence in humans provides a more plausible reason for the farmers to willingly participate in controlling the disease in animals,” NDDB’s chairman Dilip Rath said.
