Pending Agricultural Policy

Editor,

As the Agriculture policy of Meghalaya has till date not seen the light of the day, sometime ago our Agriculture Minister, Banteidor Lyngdoh had emphatically asserted that this policy can be deferred for sometime hence, as it is a no brainer exercise. What, however, may perplex the discerning minds was the Minister’s expression of views that our Agriculture policy can be contextualized with that of Punjab and Telengana, thus unleashing a fluster of sorts amidst the knowledgeable circles as skeptics query how these two states in question which do not, inter alia, bear identical agro-climatic, crop-pattern indices with Meghalaya be co-related in terms of farm policy?

Incidentally, several years ago I had the privilege to attend a conference centering around agriculture and all-round developmental aspects wherein I was made to understand in one of the discourse sessions that like in our state of Meghalaya which bears striking similarities with Himachal Pradesh, Uttarakhand and a few others in the sphere of agro- climatic endowments ought to therefore serve as a benchmark of our Agriculture policy. Notably Himachal Pradesh is widely known for a slew of horticulture crops like potatoes and varieties of fruits, especially apples which hugely contributed to the economic boon of the State. This is akin to Meghalaya horticultural fruits where an orange variety known as Khasi Mandarin has attained enviable status globally for its exceptional flavor. To replicate the agriculture policy of Punjab and Telengana into our framework policy is an oxymoron. Our Agriculture Department, lately re-christened as Agriculture & Farmers’ Welfare Department, indubitably possesses qualified expertise/officers galore who could have come handy in this context of structuring an effective agricultural policy in close co-ordination with the Minister concerned.

Meghalaya being essentially an agrarian – driven economy where roughly 80% of the population is engaged in farming there is dire need for a sustainable and robust agriculture policy whereby the farming community could boost their farm produce leading to their corresponding economic prosperity It is surprising therefore that having come to existence for nearly half century ,Meghalaya is still bereft of an agricultural policy whose guidelines might have gone a long way in the holistic all round development for farm husbandry.

Yours etc.,

Jerome K. Diengdoh,

Via email

Bank amalgamation

Editor,

The announcement to amalgamate major banks comes as a surprise as one understands that such a decision has been taken cautiously by the Ministry of Finance in recent years. The move for such a decision as has been cited is to infuse capital into the banks as the economy now is staring at a gloomy future. Through such a restructuring exercise to minimize bad loans and NPA mess apart from economic crisis, one will not be surprised if more such plans are implemented in future, thereby setting a trend for further amalgamation of the banking system in the coming years.

It needs to be seen as to how quickly and effectively such an amalgamated banking entity will penetrate into the businesses, citing common operational framework, as all the banks share a common banking software. It also needs to be seen as to how well the Government, RBI and BBB will convince such a mammoth bank restructuring exercise to the end customers, the employees, the banking unions etc. to move into such a new type of amalgamated banking entity.

In a bid to satisfy restructuring and strengthening the banking system requirements, it should also be noted that the move may impact the already declining perception of the existing customers and other beneficiaries associated with the Indian traditional banking system in recent years. An innovative plan is now necessary to be implemented to ensure that the customers are moved to the new entity without much procedural hassles and ensure smooth transition of business into the newly formed banks.

Yours etc.,

Varun Dambal

Bangalore – 72

Let’s stop using plastics

Editor,

Even though plastic is something that is part of our daily life the same causes terrible menace to the whole of humanity when it is not cautiously handled and simply discarded. Plastic carelessly thrown clog drainage systems, pollute water bodies and are a menace to animals too. Plastic turns a big menace polluting water bodies and even the ocean killing the organisms and the rich marine life. Plastic burning causes fatal health problems to the public. The Prime Minister’s recent call to the nation to make India a ‘Single use plastic free one ‘ that is ,an urge to reduce especially single-use plastic carriers, containers, food packages etc is definitely one to think about seriously and execute measures promptly without any delay.

A formidable problem like the plastic menace can be solved only with the help of whole hearted support from everyone. We here in Kannur are indebted to former Collector Mir Mohammed Ali ,the former Mayor of Kannur City and the authorities who made it possible to control this menace in a big way .General awareness, warning followed by penalisation were the steps thrust to reduce and control this menace. In our Kannur City Corporation a total ban was possible with the citizens too putting their heart and soul into action to see that not only the city but the whole district turns plastic free. Even though there are hiccups the action is going on smoothly here and there is full co-operation from everyone. People going for shopping carry cloth bags and those who don’t, either have to buy bags from the shop or else return empty handed. The collectors “collecting plastic at school,” campaign also was very successful as children were made aware of the menace and the need to make their tomorrow and that of the whole world a better one

Yours etc.,

M Pradyu

Kannur -1

Terror tactics in Kashmir valley

Editor,

It is highly disturbing to read the report that terroristgroups have issued threats to locals in the Kashmir valley against opening shops and schools through posters put up in various areas. Posters belonging to terror outfits Hizbul Mujaheedin and Lashker-e-Taiba have been recovered by the Army. In one of their posters, locals have been warned against plying their private vehicles on roads.Traders have also been warned by the terrorist outfits particularly in the last two weeks from carrying out business.

This is an alarming situation regardless of heavy presence of the army in these areas. It is an indicator that the rebellious and blood-thirsty nature of the terrorists has not died out in spite of umpteen exhortations and appeals, let alone many offers made to them to eschew violence and return to the peaceful path. Terrorists have no any objective to achieve except destroying the peace prevailing in the valley thereby destroying the country.

On different dates of this month, terrorists threatened traders against opening their shops and also threatened against sending fruits outside Kashmir. They have also threatened farmers against selling their farm products. At this juncture, the Army have to study the modus operandi of the terrorist groups and come out with solutions on how to tackle them so that people can live peacefully in the valley.

Yours etc.,

TK Nandanan,

Kochi – 1
