Durga puja 'tax': Mamata or BJP, who'll feel the pinch? | India Today Insight

West Bengal politics is witnessing fresh sparks ahead of the festive season. With the ruling Trinamool Congress (TMC) and the BJP out to project themselves as the true custodian of Bengali culture and ethos, Durga puja, the state's biggest festival beginning October 4, has become the current space that both parties want to dominate and control.

An estimated 28,000 community Durga pujas are held in West Bengal. Though involvement in the puja or religious festivals has been an old practice among the state's Congress politicians, the TMC has taken this 'bhakti' to newer heights, its government offering doles and subsidies hitherto unseen. On August 30, chief minister Mamata Banerjee announced that the grant for associations holding community Durga puja was being increased from Rs 10,000 last year to Rs 25,000. Puja associations run by women would be entitled to an additional Rs 5,000. Electricity bills incurred by puja committees would be eligible for a 25 per cent waiver.

Puja clubs may welcome the financial 'gift', but the state BJP is unimpressed. Party general secretary Sayantan Basu says: "Mamata Banerjee is throwing crumbs at puja committees. No amount of populism will help her in future elections. The BJP believes in justice for all and appeasement of none."

Mamata also instructed puja associations not to pay income tax and accused the BJP-led central government of using the agency to settle political scores with opponents. It's a charge she has often repeated this year. From the podium of government programmes and public rallies, she has been claiming that income-tax authorities are hounding puja committees-in other words, Bengal's most popular festival is under threat from the saffron camp.

The campaign has been fought on social media too, such as the 'Amar Gorbo Mamata' page on Facebook and #RespectDurgaPujo on Twitter. A cartoon appeared on Facebook, showing a perplexed goddess Durga being asked to produce PAN (Permanent Account Number), Aadhaar and income-tax returns as 'gate-pass' for entering Bengal. The Central Board of Direct Taxes (CBDT) issued a clarification on August 13, debunking reports about taxing Durga pujas. It said notices were issued last December to only a handful of puja associations in order to nail puja contractors and event managers defaulting on tax. 'The department had been getting information that several contractors working for puja committees were not paying due taxes,' stated the CBDT letter.

Puja and politics have always rubbed shoulders in Bengal, and like other parties, the TMC has been no different. After the party came to power in 2011, puja clubs started vying with each other to woo TMC leaders and functionaries-all aimed at building hype and mobilising funds. Soon, prominent Durga pujas came to be associated with TMC heavyweights. For instance, 'Bobby-r pujo' (puja where urban development minister Firhad Hakim aka Bobby is involved), 'Partha-r pujo' (puja associated with education minister Partha Chatterjee), 'Aroop-er pujo' (after public works minister Aroop Biswas).

For the BJP, one of the principal strategies to breach the TMC fortress in Bengal was unifying the Hindu vote. And Mamata's alleged appeasement of minorities was just the fuel it needed. In the beginning with, the BJP was pushing its own pantheon of gods and goddesses-celebrating Ram Navami, Hanuman Jayanti and Janmashtami with elan, but it soon realised that the way to Bengali hearts would be easier through their icons (the likes of Rabindranath Tagore, Vivekananda and Netaji Subhas Bose) and mother deities. Thus, Durga puja. The party seized the opportunity in 2017 when the Mamata government postponed the immersion of idols after Durga puja by a day to avoid a clash of dates with Muharram. The issue got unexpected traction as the BJP accused Mamata of undermining Hindus.

Now, the impressive showing in the Lok Sabha election-18 seats and a 23 per cent vote share-has naturally opened many puja club doors for the BJP in the state. For instance, 'Shanghasree, Baish Palli', a big-ticket Durga puja in Mamata's assembly constituency of Bhabanipur (Kolkata South), replaced its president and Mamata's younger brother Kartik with the BJP's Basu. However, as word spread, the puja committee favouring the induction of BJP leaders was dissolved and Basu had to make an exit. Even the Durga idol artist, who had conceptualised the goddess as sitting on a lotus, was told to go. However, some major Durga pujas in central and north Kolkata, where the Hindi-speaking population is quite high, have made their preferences public.

The BJP is determined not to let go of this momentum. "Mamata is playing dirty politics by talking about Durga puja celebrations being taxed. We are planning to bring Amit Shah-ji to inaugurate a few pujas in Kolkata, but we won't disclose anything now," says a state BJP leader, requesting anonymity. "We are keeping the names of puja committees patronised by us under wraps as they would be attacked by Mamata's goons."

But even as the BJP draws up grand plans, Mamata is not the one to sit silent. After the grant for puja clubs, festive souls can expect her to announce a holiday bonanza too. A 'devi' with Durga puja bounties for all?

Also read | The shop's open but no one's shopping

Also read | The new tax plan

Also read | Why the RBI's repo rate cuts have not (yet) led to cheaper loans
