Pakistan Has Smart Bombs, Will Cut India Into 22 Parts In War: Sheikh Rashid

New Delhi:

It seems Pakistan Railways Minister Sheikh Rashid Ahmad suffers from an acute case of 'foot-in-the-mouth' syndrome. After predicting that India and Pakistan are going to be involved in full-blown war starting October or November, Rashid has came out with another gem.

He has now claimed that Pakistan has atom bombs who weigh as low as 125 to 250 grams. Rasheed has warned India that these 'smart bombs' are capable of targetting specific areas.

Bomb na hu gaya, doodh/dahi hu gayi jo pao-adha-pao mein bhi mil rahi hai. pic.twitter.com/YnRgpgaCkp — Naila Inayat à¤¨à¤¾à¤¯à¤²à¤¾ à¤‡à¤¨à¤¾à¤¯à¤¤ (@nailainayat) September 1, 2019

According to reports in Pakistan media, Rashid warned Narendra Modi government of India against any eventuality. He said India committed two blunders: firstly, conducting atomic explosions with a wrong perception that Pakistan would not do so; secondly, it scrapped special status of Kashmir on August 5, believing Kashmiris would not react over it.

Rashid said, "Dialogue is possible if India takes a step towards resolving the Kashmir issue as per the United Nations resolutions.”

He warned India to avoid a war, lest it proves the last one between the two nuclear armed countries. The minister if a war was imposed on Pakistan, India would be divided into 22 parts.

Rashid said that Prime Minister Imran Khan had raised the Kashmir issue all-over the world in an unprecedented way. He said, "India considers Muslims as second grade citizens and same situation was in Assam and other states of India," he added.

Rashid Ahmad was recently in news after a video of him getting a minor electric shock during a rally went viral. Rashid suffered the shock while he was speaking against Prime Minister Narendra Modi on the Kashmir issue.

Sheikh Rasheed k mic mein Modi ne current bhej diya: pic.twitter.com/LsTobPov1q — Naila Inayat à¤¨à¤¾à¤¯à¤²à¤¾ à¤‡à¤¨à¤¾à¤¯à¤¤ (@nailainayat) August 30, 2019

Rashid has also predicted a full-blown war between the two countries underlining that the war is likely to occur in October or November. While addressing a ceremony in his home town Rawalpindi, Rashid had said that the time for a final struggle for Kashmir has come and the war with India will be the "last this time".

For all the Latest World News, Download News Nation Android and iOS Mobile Apps.
