The next mandate

The writer, a former Union Minister, needs to look at his party’s own history of being in cahoots with the mob in stifling the freedom of expression (Editorial page, “The essence of the next mandate”, January 28). Who can forget how the party aided forces that were against The Satanic Verses? The present dispensation may be synonymous with a flaring up of communal tensions, but the fact is the Opposition too does not have constitutional values in mind. To gain the confidence of independent voters who do not have any political predisposition, the Opposition needs to be more vocal about acknowledging its fatal flaws and make credible promises that it will not pursue such lines if it comes to power.

M. Nikhilesh,

Hyderabad

The writer appears to be living in an ivory tower as he is totally disconnected from ground realities. The so-called ‘mahagathbandhan’ is non-existent as every one of its constituents is following a different trajectory. Voters face a catch-22 situation and are befuddled. The BJP is bound to have an easy run in the general election.

Deepak Singhal,

Noida

One-sided political commentaries offer little in terms of new insights about election-related themes except the weaving of false narratives tailored to bolster the prospects of a political party. It was amusing to read the ponderous and poetic evocations about the perceived threats to democracy. The use of high-sounding metaphorical evocations not only fail to square up with the current political realities but also smack of palpable opportunism. In fact, the greatest threat to democracy seems to arise from the intolerance of the Congress which has been behaving as if it has a personal score to settle with the Prime Minister. Unfortunately for the Congress, smear campaigns and clever propaganda belong to the pre-Internet era.

V.N. Mukundarajan,

Thiruvananthapuram

Since 2014, we have seen the preaching of a majoritarian agenda for electoral gains, hits to our secular ethos and pluralistic fabric, and a rise in social and economic disparities. These are only a few examples. I hope ‘the soul of a suppressed nation’ does assert its authority.

Kshitij Mani Tripathi,

Lucknow
