'Imran Khan's comments taken out of context, no change in Pak's nuclear policy': Pak Foreign Office

'Imran Khan's comments taken out of context, no change in Pak's nuclear policy': Pak Foreign Office

"We both are nuclear-armed countries. If these tensions increase, the world could be in danger," Khan said addressing members of the Sikh religious community in eastern city of Lahore. "There will be no first from our side ever," he said.

After spending the majority of last month raising the nuclear bogey, writing op-eds and whining about ‘fascist BJP-RSS’ like a broken record, Imran Khan was quoted saying by Reuters that Pakistan wouldn’t use ‘nuclear weapons first’.

Pakistan will not use nuclear weapons first, Prime Minister Imran Khan said on Monday, amid tensions with arch-rival India after New Delhi revoked the special status of its part of the disputed Kashmir region.

"We both are nuclear-armed countries. If these tensions increase, the world could be in danger," Khan said addressing members of the Sikh religious community in eastern city of Lahore. "There will be no first from our side ever," he said.

Senior journalist Ankit Panda however disagreed with the translation put out by Reuters and wrote:

My translation broadly: "We’re two nuclear-armed neighbors. If going ahead, tensions rise, then the whole world is threatened. So this is why I’m telling you that our side will never be the one to start things.” More about war-initiation vs. nuclear-weapons use. — Ankit Panda (@nktpnd) September 2, 2019

Panda's translation would suggest that Khan said that Pak wouldn't be the 'one to start things', where things doesn't necessarily mean 'nuclear weapons'.





Incidentally, India's Defence Minister Rajnath Singh had said: "Till today, our nuclear policy is 'No First Use'. What happens in future depends on the circumstances."

Pak's Foreign Office later tweeted that there was no change in Pakistan's nuclear policy and that Imran Khan's comments were 'taken out of context'.
