Pak's lawyer admits Islamabad can't take Kashmir issue to ICJ, says it has 'no proof of genocide'

Pak's lawyer admits Islamabad can't take Kashmir issue to ICJ, says it has 'no proof of genocide'

masquerading as ‘neutral journalists’ while happily toeing Pakistan’s line – Pakistan’s lawyer at ICJ Khawar Qureshi has admitted that it has no ‘significant evidence to back its claims of genocide in Kashmir’.

Despite bluster from Imran Khan and his coterie of ministers – not to mention the propagandists masquerading as ‘neutral journalists’ while happily toeing Pakistan’s line – Pakistan’s lawyer at ICJ Khawar Qureshi has admitted that it has no ‘significant evidence to back its claims of genocide in Kashmir’.

"In absence of these evidences, it is extremely difficult for Pakistan to take this case to the ICJ," said Khawar Qureshi.

Pakistan Prime Minister Imran Khan on Monday assured that his country won't be the first to use nuclear weapons in case of war or conflict with India.



"We both are nuclear-armed countries. If these tensions increase, the world could be in danger. There will be no first from our side ever. There will never be any kind of initiative from us," said Imran Khan at the International Sikh Convention in Governor House.

Khan's comments comes in the wake of remarks by his ministers of nuclear war between India and Pakistan, Prime Minister Imran Khan on Monday said his country will not start a war.

In an interview with Politico, during his two-day trip to Brussels last week, the Jaishankar had stressed that the idea of dialogue with Pakistan will not be effective while it "openly practices terrorism." The External Affairs Minister response came after Pakistan Prime Minister Imran Khan authored an article in New York Times on the "impending threat" of nuclear war over Kashmir.

Qureshi incidentally was the same lawyer who represented Pakistan during Kulbhushan Jadhav trial, where the ICJ ruled in India’s favour by a 15-1 verdict and stayed his execution and asked for Jadhav to be granted consular access.

India’s top diplomat in Pakistan met Jadhav yesterday and said that Pakistan was putting immense pressure on him to ‘parrot a false narrative’.

Jadhav, 49, a retired Indian Navy officer, was sentenced to death by the Pakistani military court on charges of "espionage and terrorism" after a closed trial in April 2017. His sentencing evoked a sharp reaction in India.

The ICJ had specified in the verdict that Pakistan is obliged to grant consular or diplomatic access to Kulbhushan Jadhav "without further delay" in accordance with the Vienna Convention on Consular Relations. Following the verdict, Islamabad had said that it was working out the modalities to grant the consular access.

How Pak has provided comic relief post Article 370 abrogation:

When Abdul Basit thought porn star Johnny Sins was a 'Kashmiri blinded by pellets'

Forget penning op-ed, Imran can’t tell the time

How Kashmir Hour angered Pakistanis

Dawood’s in-law Javed Miandad threatens India with a sword at LoC

Pak actor demands ‘limited war with India’

Twitter mocks Imran’s nuclear bluff

‘Influence of Im the Dim’: Pak PM Imran Khan trolled after most students in his constituency fail Class IX exam
