Control your MLAs or I’ll quit as CM, HDK warns ally Congress

BENGALURU: Squabbling within the ruling coalition in Karnataka reached a new low on Monday with JD(S) leader H D Kumaraswamy threatening to resign as chief minister if his ally Congress “failed to control its MLAs”. The trigger for Kumaraswamy’s threat was the attack on him on Sunday by a Congress MLA close to former CM Siddaramaiah , who alleged that development in Bengaluru had slowed down under the new CM.“If my way of functioning is not acceptable, I am ready to resign. I don’t crave for position,” said Kumaraswamy. Issuing a veiled threat, he added, “Congress leaders have to take care of such issues and must control their MLAs who are crossing the line. I’m not the person who should be doing it. If they want to continue with it, I’m ready to step down.”At a public event here on Sunday where lavish praise was heaped on Siddaramaiah, ST Somashekar, who was recently appointed chairman of Bengaluru Development Authority, echoed the sentiment that Siddaramaiah should have got another opportunity to become CM. Bemoaning that development work in the city did not match the previous regime’s, the MLA said, “The coalition government is in power for the past seven months but it is yet to prepare an action plan.”Embarrassed by Kumaraswamy’s outbursts, Congress leaders went into a damage-control mode. KPCC president Dinesh Gundu Rao said he would issue a show-cause notice to Somashekar. “If there are any shortcomings in our government, they should discuss them with the CM or deputy CM G Parameshwara (of Congress). We will not tolerate such indiscipline,” he said.Congress leader Mallikarjun Kharge advised his party MLAs not to speak against the wishes of the party high command. “They should not react openly in the media. We have all come together to fight BJP-RSS. Such incidents will create confusion in the coalition,” he said.Hours later, Somashekar met Rao in his office to apologise. “I had no intention to cause embarrassment to our government or humiliate Kumaraswamy. I was only talking about the development works in my constituency. If anyone is hurt by my statement, I will apologise,” he said.But the MLA’s remarks have increased the friction between the allies. JD(S) minister C S Puttaraju said it was Congress who “begged and came to our doorstep” for an alliance. “BJP had treated us well when we had formed an alliance with them in 2006-07. Congress is unnecessarily troubling us,’’ he added.Home minister M B Patil countered saying Congress had not gone to the doorstep of JD(S) only for power. “We wanted secular parties to join hands and keep BJP away. Though we had 78 MLAs then, we still sacrificed the CM’s post to ensure a secular government.”Siddaramaiah, who was in Mysuru, downplayed the controversy saying there is no trouble with JD(S) and that he will speak to Kumaraswamy. “You (media) are the people who create trouble,’’ he added.
