Amit Shah assures Rs 2 lakh life insurance for each panch and sarpanch in Jammu and Kashmir

File picture: Union Home Minister Amit Shah | Photo Credit: IANS

Key Highlights Amit Shah met the delegation composed of panchs and sarpanchs at his North Block office The Union Home Minister assured that communication in the region would be restored in accordance with the situation Amit Shah also vowed full statehood once normalcy returns

New Delhi: Union Home Minister Amit Shah on Tuesday met a delegation from Jammu and Kashmir after the scrapping of the provisions of Article 370 and bifurcation of the border state. In the first such meeting, Amit Shah announced that each panch and sarpanch in the newly-formed Union Territory will be provided Rs 2 lakh life insurance cover.

Shah further gave an assurance that communication in the region would be restored in accordance with the situation. He also vowed full statehood once normalcy returns.

The senior BJP leader met the delegation composed of panchs and sarpanchs at his North Block office at around 1 pm.

In the first week of August, the Centre announced its decision to revoke Article 370 of Constitution, which accorded special status to Jammu and Kashmir. Parliament had also approved the bifurcation of the erstwhile state into two Union Territories -- Jammu and Kashmir with an Assembly and Ladakh without one.

After his meeting with Amit Shah, a panchayat member, named Mir Junaid, said the Home Minister assured them "of providing Rs 2 lakh insurance to each panch and sarpanch in Jammu and Kashmir".

The meeting was attended by Union Minister Jitendra Singh, Union Minister of State for Home Nityanand Rai, Home Secretary Ajay Kumar Bhalla, Additional Secretary, J&K, Gyanesh Kumar and senior officers of Kashmir division.

Later, Jitendra Singh said that the Home Minister cautioned the delegation not to be deluded by the misinformation being spread in J&K.

He further said that Shah told the delegation: "There would be peace everywhere in Jammu and Kashmir."

"The Home Minister assured them (delegation) that this is only a passing phase. Statehood will return back when normalcy is restored there. The sarpanchs assured the Home Minister that they would whole-heartedly participate in the BDC (Block Development Council) elections which are to happen in the next two months..."

"The government would travel down to the villages and it will be through the medium of sarpanches. The priorities of the people will be decided on merit," added Singh.

When asked about the inconvenience caused because of restrictions on mobile in the region, Singh said: "The fact cannot be denied. But there has been no untoward incident over the last four weeks ever since the abrogation of Article 370 happened."

"The restrictions on mobiles to a large extent have been lifted up in the entire Jammu region, Doda belt and also a number of districts in Kashmir Valley. So gradually this is happening... The restrictions will also be done away within few weeks."
