VHP Backed Group Forces Keralites To Take Off Beef From Their Menu In German Festival

The long held debate over food preference among Indians which a recently turned violent in some cases is seeing its traces overseas. The latest incident comes from far off Germany where the group began beef policing against south Indians who were offering beef.

A group of Malayalees living in Frankfurt, Germany has accused some Hindutva groups of forcing them to remove beef from their menu for the Indien Fest 2019 organised by the Consulate General of India Frankfurt on 31st August.

Representational Image

According to the Kerala Samajam Frankfurt, for the event the all Indian organizations were asked to present the common delicacies of each state. As per these instructions, Kerala Samajam Frankfurt had prepared the menu, out of which one was Porotta and beef, one of the most popular food items in Kerala.

Kerala Samajam Frankfurt/ Facebook

However, it did not go down well some Hindutva groups.

According to Donny George, a Kerala man, who is currently residing in Frankfurt, some VHP activists objected to the menu and threatened to protests against it.

The Kerala Samajam said after the CGI Frankfurt requested them to revise the menu so that the event could be held without any incidents, they decided to comply, to maintain peace and harmony.

George added that following the removal of beef from the menu, the Kerala Samajam boycotted the event and a group of people held a protest against the spread of religious intolerance and curtailing of the freedom of food even outside India.

Donny George/ Facebook

While it is a fact that the majority of India does not consume beef for religious reasons, there are states like Kerala, Tamil Nadu, West Bengal, and the North East where people do eat beef.

Representational Image

In fact, beef is one of the most sought after delicacies in Kerala and various beef dishes are eaten by people from all religions in the state.

It is so popular in the state that once a BJP candidate in Kerala contested an election in the state on the promise that he will assure the supply of quality beef if he is elected.
