Out of NRC, Hajongs from East Pakistan stare at hard times

GUWAHATI: Renu Bala Hajong was barely eight years old when her parents were forced to leave their village in erstwhile East Pakistan's Mymensing district in 1964. After travelling on foot and bullock carts for days, they first reached Meghalaya's Garo Hills before entering Assam 's Goalpara district where were finally rehabilitated as refugees.Lakhs of refugees, mostly Hajongs, Garos, Kochs and Bengali Hindus, were displaced by communal riots in East Pakistan (now Bangladesh) and later settled in different refugee camps across Assam in 1960. According to some estimates, refugees numbering up to 5,00,000, including those who fled after Partition, entered Assam till the 1960s.At Matiya in Goalpara, about 160 km from here, Renu Bala and hundreds of other refugees mostly belonging to the Hajong community were settled in the 1960s. Subsequently, all of them became Indian citizens. But after being exluded from the final NRC , their sense of belongingness has received a major jolt. "We forgot our violent past in East Pakistan as we became citizens of India. Our children were born here and they are citizens. But when I found that many of us are not there in the NRC, the sense of belongingness got hurt,'' said Renu Bala.There are about 250 Hajong families comprising 700 people at Matiya and its neighbouring areas. Over 100 of them, mostly women, were excluded from the final NRC released on Saturday. "The names of my three sons, daughters in law and their children were included in the NRC but I have been excluded. Like me, several women from my community were excluded. We are poor and don't know how we will manage money and resources to fight our cases in the foreigner's tribunal,'' Renu Bala said.Minoti Hajong (50) said majority of them submitted refugee certificates as one of the 15 eligible documents applicable for inclusion in the NRC. ''I am clueless how my name was dropped when my husband and two sons are included,'' Minoti said.Rohila Hajong (28), who works as a midday meal cook at a local school, said she also submitted refugee certificate for inclusion and was also called for hearing twice. "In each hearing, I spent about Rs 500. Above all, it took lot of time to travel. I am worried about the hardships that I have to go through again to prove my citizenship," she added.Mani Sankar Goyari, district secretary of Krishak Mukti Sangram Samiti who is highlighting the plight of the refugees, said the government should take special initiative to help refugees and their descendants left out of the NRC.Chief minister Sababanda Sonowal's legal adviser Shantanu Bharali said the reason the government has been demanding re-verification is to ensure that no genuine Indian is left out. "Our appeal is that they should not panic. The government will do its best to help out Indians excluded from the NRC," he added.Prior to the release of NRC, officials engaged in the updating exercise said a large number of people, who had submitted refugee certificates for inclusion in the draft NRC, were rejected by the NRC authorities for non-availability of record with the government. They said a conservative estimate indicated that for every 100 such certificates, at least 60 were found ineligible.
