Senior advocate HS Phoolka quits AAP, will brief media in Delhi tomorrow on his resignation-Politics News , Firstpost

Phoolka took to Twitter to announce his resignation. He said that even though he handed over his resignation to Arvind Kejriwal, but the Chief Minister of Delhi asked him not to.

Advocate HS Phoolka resigned from Aam Aadmi Party (AAP) late on Thursday, ANI reported.

Phoolka took to Twitter to announce his resignation. He said that even though he handed over his resignation to Arvind Kejriwal, the Chief Minister of Delhi asked him not to.

I have resigned from AAP & handed over resignation to Kejriwal ji today. Though he asked me not to resign but I insisted.

Will be briefing media tomorrow at 4pm at Press Club, Raisina Rd, New Delhi to explain the Reason of leaving AAP & my further plans. — H S Phoolka (@hsphoolka) January 3, 2019

The senior advocate of Delhi High Court will brief the media on Thursday at Press Club in New Delhi to explain the resignation and discuss his future plans.

Phoolka had resigned as a legislator from the Punjab Assembly in October, expressing unhappiness over the state government's alleged "failure" to initiate action against former Chief Minister Parkash Singh Badal and retired DGP Sumedh Singh Saini in sacrilege incidents.

He had then visited the Election Commission office in Delhi where he had told reporters, "More than 45 days have passed since ministers of the Congress government promised in the Vidhan Sabha action against Parkash Singh Badal and the then director general of police Sumedh Singh Saini. But no action has come about so far. This is a betrayal for the people of Punjab."

Earlier in July, Phoolka had mentioned quitting the AAP if it joined hands with the Congress.

He had made it clear that any understanding with Congress would amount to giving a clean chit to the alleged "perpetrators" of the 1984 anti-Sikh riots.

"I shall be the first person to quit the Aam Aadmi Party if and when it joins hands with the Congress (either) in a direct or indirect manner," said Phoolka in Ludhiana.

His statement had come after Punjab chief minister Amarinder Singh supported senior party leader P Chidambaram's views on the need for a broad-based alliance with other Opposition parties at the meeting of the Congress Working Committee (CWC) at Delhi on Sunday.

Phoolka blamed the Congress for the violence that took place in the aftermath of the then Prime Minister Indira Gandhi's assassination.

With inputs from PTI
