DK Shivakumar arrested because he's important Congress leader, says Karti Chidambaram

The Centre has angst against capable leaders like DK Shivakumar: Karti Chidambaram | File photo from PTI

Congress leader DK Shivakumar was arrested by the Enforcement Directorate (ED) under Prevention of Money Laundering Act (PMLA) on Tuesday.

Soon after he arrest, Karti Chidambaram told India Today that enforcement agencies are acting like gestapo (secret police of Nazi Germany).

Karti Chidambaram said that Congress leaders who are critical to the structure of the party are being targeted by the government through central agencies.

"DK Shivakumar became a target of the government ever since he became instrumental in Ahmed Patel's win in the Gujarat elections. The Centre has angst against capable leaders like DK Shivakumar," Karti Chidambaram said.

Karti Chidambaram told India Today that DK Shivakumar was targeted because "he's is Congress's good election manager".

Karti Chidambaram was arrested by the Central Bureau of Investigation (CBI) in February last year in connection with the INX Media case and the ED has questioned Karti Chidambaram on several occasions in the INX Media case.

"The agencies are acting without any ground for the arrests. It's only for the optics. The Congress leaders, one after another, are being arrested to cover up the failures. If the agencies have even a shred of evidence, why a chargesheet has not been filed in my case. I was kept in custody for 11 days and still there is no chargesheet," Karti Chidambaram told India Today.

Karti Chidamabarm said that the ED has "no business to arrest anyone" and pointed out that the people should be arrested when the ED has proof against them.

"I have appeared before the ED 20 times and have been raided four times. I can't comment on the merit of the complaint. These arrests are drama to intimidate Congress leaders," Karti Chidambaram said.

Karti Chidambaram said that the ED is carrying out investigations for the optics. "First it was P Chidambaram [Karti's father] and now it's DK Shivakumar," Karti Chidambaram said adding that "these probes are like TV drama".
