GIVE PEACE A CHANCE

It must be stated to the credit of Pakistan Prime Minister Imran Khan that a sense of realism guides his thinking. He often speaks his mind irrespective of the consequences. This, even as feelings persist that he’s a puppet of the Pakistan army. His latest statement was to affirm that Pakistan would not start a nuclear war with India at any cost. This, after threats from ministers on both sides that anything could happen; Khan himself sent an SOS to world leaders that a nuclear war between India and his country was likely.

In all fairness, Khan and the political establishment there as a whole are jittery over the kind of changes effected in Jammu and Kashmir state by the Indian government. By abrogating Articles 370 and 35A, the Centre reinforced India’s total commitment to Kashmir; and the world community stood by this action despite diplomatic pressure from Pakistan. After weeks of threats and big talks, a statement that came from a Pakistani minister two days ago is proof that the Islamic nation is not contemplating any harsh action. He made it clear Pakistan is ready to talk things out with India on condition that the jailed leaders are set free in Jammu and Kashmir, and he is given the freedom to talk to them.

The latest on the Kashmir front is that Pakistan’s all-weather ally China has officially advised the Islamic nation to try and solve issues with India via a peaceful, diplomatic route. China is caught in a fix in Hong Kong, and has its own problem with separatism in Xinjiang in the western sector too. The whole world knows India’s action in J & K came in the backdrop of hard-edged militancy transforming itself into terrorism of the worst kind over the past three decades. Terrorist outfits based in Pakistan are targeting not just India but also Afghanistan and Iran; earning it a rogue nation status.

This is time for Imran Khan to not only speak in positive tones but also act in a similar manner. Prime Minister Modi had, at the start of his first term in Delhi, called on Pakistan to join hands with India to jointly fight the scourge of poverty in both the nations. Pakistan cannot afford a war with India; it is rather that new acquisitions like Rafale jets and Apache helicopters by the Indian military have only been adding a new edge to India’s lethality. Cooperation is the way forward for both nations. It rests on both nations to give peace a chance.
