IMD issues red alert for Mumbai rains: The colour codes for weather alerts, explained

Mumbai has been inundated after heavy rain. | Photo Credit: PTI

Key Highlights Many places in Mumbai suburbs and adjoining areas like Thane and Navi Mumbai have recorded over 100mm of rainfall in the last 24 hours. Green colour indicates that people should stock essential supplies and create an emergency plan. An orange alert implies a risk to people and property.

Mumbai woke up to another wet morning on Wednesday as incessant rain continued to lash Maximum City. Heavy rains led to flooding in many areas and schools remained closed after the dire forecasts. According to media reports, many places in Mumbai suburbs and adjoining areas like Thane and Navi Mumbai have recorded over 100mm of rainfall in the last 24 hours.

In view of the heavy rainfall, the India Meteorological Department (IMD) issued a red alert for Mumbai, Thane, Palghar and Raigad. Train services got affected too. Central Railways, taking to Twitter, informed Mumbaikars: “Due to continuous & heavy rains, services stopped between CSMT-Thane on main line; Vadala-Vashi on harbour line.”

Western Railways too asked passengers to check the train status as many long-distance trains could be cancelled.

Traffic snarls in many areas were also witnessed, and flights got delayed. According to The Times of India, around 1,500 people had to be evacuated from Kranti Nagar and Kurla as the Mithi river overflowed.

What is colour code warning system?

A colour-coded weather warning system is used to alert the public about the predicted severity of weather: cyclones, floods, storms and winds. The colour system ranges from green, which is low risk, to red, which is the highest risk of severe conditions.

Green colour: This colour implies there is no warning as such, but people should stock essential supplies and create an emergency plan.

Yellow colour: This colour indicates that hazardous conditions are possible and people need to be aware of the potential impacts of the changing weather. In case of a yellow warning, people should monitor weather conditions and pay attention to IMD updates.

Orange colour: Through an orange warning, the IMD indicates a risk to people and property. In this case, IMD asks people to be prepared to safeguard themselves, their family and property.

Red colour: Red colour signifies great risk to people and property. It also suggests that significant damage and disruption could take place. In this case, IMD asks people in the area to take immediate action to protect their property and kin and, if required, move to safer locations.
