India Pakistan War: Pakistan's ambiguity over nuclear war with India comes to the fore

Imran Khan

Pakistan Foreign Office

Shah Mahmood Qureshi

NEW DELHI: The Narendra Modi government’s move to change the status of Jammu and Kashmir by nullifying Article 370 of the Constitution on August 5 has left the Pakistan leadership confused and rattled.Pakistan Prime Minister Imran Khan and foreign minister Shah Mahmood Qureshi have been blowing hot and cold, sometimes threatening war with India and on other occasions pledging not to initiate war and adhering to a ‘no first use nuclear policy’.Strangely, Imran Khan and Shah Mahmood Qureshi appear to be contradicting each other by talking in forked tongues.This presents a stark contrast to India where the government is speaking in one voice.Whether Prime Minister Narendra Modi or his ministerial colleagues such as external affairs minister S Jaishankar, defence minister Rajnath Singh and home minister Amit Shah or even the external affairs ministry, all are of the firm belief that nullification of Article 370 is an internal matter of the country and Kashmir is a bilateral issue between India and Pakistan.Rajnath Singh did hint at a change in India's no first use policy in place since the Atal Bihari Vajpayee government's days. However, no one in the Modi government or the party has contradicted him.The primary discordant notes in India on Kashmir come from the opposition party Congress and local Kashmiri leaders who are not on the same page as the Modi government.Leader of the Congress party in the Lok Sabha Adhir Ranjan Chowdhury said in the house that Kashmir was not a bilateral issue.Former Congress president Rahul Gandhi portrayed an alarming situation in Kashmir after his unsuccessful visit to Srinagar on August 24. He said, “Things in Jammu and Kashmir are going very wrong. There are reports of violence. There are reports of people dying in Jammu and Kashmir.”Rahul Gandhi’s remarks were even used by Pakistan in the UN to attack India. The neighbouring country, in a letter to the UN on the withdrawal of Articles 35A and 370 in Jammu and Kashmir, quoted Gandhi as saying that the people were “dying” in Jammu and Kashmir.Soon after, Rahul Gandhi issued a rebuttal. “I disagree with this [Modi] government on many issues. But, let me make this absolutely clear: Kashmir is India’s internal issue and there is no room for Pakistan or any other foreign country to interfere in it… There is violence in Jammu & Kashmir. There is violence because it is instigated and supported by Pakistan which is known to be the prime supporter of terrorism across the world,” he said on Twitter.Hence, while India is largely united over Kashmir, Pakistan seems to be confused.In his first reaction on the change of Jammu and Kashmir’s special status, Imran Khan on August 6 threatened that with an approach like this, "incidents like Pulwama " were bound to take place again."I can already predict this will happen. They will attempt to place the blame on us again. They may strike us again, and we will strike back," Khan said while addressing a joint session of the National Assembly."What will happen then? They will attack us and we will respond and the war can go both ways... But if we fight a war till we shed the last drop of our blood, who will win that war? No one will win it and it will have grievous consequences for the entire world. This is not nuclear blackmail," he added.On August 14, Pakistan’s independence day, Imran Khan even threatened to go to war with India following the scrapping of Article 370. In an address in Pakistan-occupied Kashmir (PoK), he said the people of his country were ready to fight for Kashmir’s "freedom".Pledging to become the “brand ambassador of Kashmir” on all international forums and threatening to go to "any extent" to defend the "freedom" of Kashmiris, Imran Khan warned Modi and said that any action by India in Pakistan would be countered with a stronger response."We will go to every global forum. We will go to the International Court of Justice. We are mobilising the global community of Kashmiris and you will see a historic number of people come out," Khan said.On August 26, Imran Khan threatened nuclear war with India over Kashmir. In an address to Pakistanis, on the Kashmir situation, he said, "If the [Kashmir] conflict moves towards war then remember both nations have nuclear weapons and no one is a winner in a nuclear war. It will have global ramifications. The superpowers of the world have a huge responsibility... whether they support us or not, Pakistan will do everything possible."In an opinion piece published in The New York Times on August 30, Imran Khan issued a warning again and said that if the world did nothing to stop India's decision on Kashmir, the two nuclear-armed countries would get ever closer to a "direct military confrontation"."With the nuclear shadow hovering over South Asia, we realise that Pakistan and India have to move out of a zero-sum mindset to begin a dialogue on Kashmir, various strategic matters and trade," he said.But on September 2, the Pakistan PM started singing a different tune, stating that war was not a solution to any problem.In a volte face, he said Pakistan would never ever start a war with India. "We will never ever start the war. Both Pakistan and India are nuclear powers and if tension escalates the world will face danger," he said while addressing a gathering of the Sikh community at the governor's house."I want to tell India that war is not a solution to any problem. The winner in war is also a loser. War gives birth to a host of other issues," he said.However, in a dramatic turn of events, the Pakistan Foreign Office contradicted its prime minister and issued a clarification on September 3.The Pakistan Foreign Office said there was no change in Pakistan's nuclear policy, hours after Imran Khan’s pledge that his country would never initiate a war with India.It said Khan's comments were taken out of context and did not represent a change in Islamabad's nuclear policy."Prime Minister's comments on Pakistan's approach towards conflict between the two nuclear armed states are being taken out of context," Foreign Office spokesperson Mohammad Faisal said."While conflict should not take place between two nuclear states, there's no change in Pakistan's nuclear policy," he added.Not just Imran Khan, but the country’s foreign minister Shah Mahmood Qureshi has made U-turn over Kashmir and its relations with India.On August 26, Qureshi was quoted as stating that Pakistan was ready for every kind of war. He was supplementing to Imran Khan’s remarks on threat of nuclear war with India.However, on August 31, Qureshi did an about turn and said war was not an option to deal with the Kashmir issue.His remarks were in contrast to those of Imran Khan who had been repeatedly threatening the possibility of a nuclear war with India over Kashmir after his efforts to internationalise the issue failed to find any favour.In an interview to BBC Urdu published on Saturday, Qureshi said Pakistan always preferred peace and never followed an aggressive policy.Pakistan has repeatedly offered talks with India because the two nuclear-armed neighbours could not take the risk of getting engaged in a war, he added.
