66 Youth Congress workers detained after scuffle with cops

New Delhi: Activists of National Students' Union of India (NSUI) - the students wing of the Congress - stage a demonstration against the arrest of senior party leader D.K. Shivakumar, in New Delhi on Sep 4, 2019. (Photo: IANS) Image Source: IANS News

New Delhi: Activists of National Students' Union of India (NSUI) - the students wing of the Congress - staging a demonstration against the arrest of senior party leader D.K. Shivakumar, being taken away by the police in New Delhi on Sep 4, 2019. (Pho Image Source: IANS News

New Delhi: Activists of National Students' Union of India (NSUI) - the students wing of the Congress - stage a demonstration against the arrest of senior party leader D.K. Shivakumar, in New Delhi on Sep 4, 2019. (Photo: IANS) Image Source: IANS News

New Delhi: Activists of National Students' Union of India (NSUI) - the students wing of the Congress - staging a demonstration against the arrest of senior party leader D.K. Shivakumar, being taken away by the police in New Delhi on Sep 4, 2019. (Pho Image Source: IANS News

New Delhi, Sep 4 : At least 66 Youth Congress workers were detained here on Wednesday following a scuffle with the police personnel during a protest against the arrest of senior Congress leader D.K. Shivakumar by the Enforcement Directorate (ED), the police said.

The protesters raised anti-government slogans, and also burnt effigies of the Prime Minister and Home Minister outside the Indian Youth Congress' office.

Later, they were heading towards the Parliament, but police had barricaded the road leading to it. However, the protesters tried to force their way through the barricades.

According to Amrish Ranjan Pandey, Youth Congress' media incharge, several protesters were detained and taken to police station.

"The police cane-charged us following which some protesters were hospitalised," Pandey said.

However, a senior police officer said no force was used against the Youth Congress workers.

Youth Congress President Srinivas BV, said: "The BJP government is targeting opposition leaders to divert attention from real issues of unemployment and economic downturn." Srinivas, who met Shivakumar at Ram Manohar Lohia hospital here on Tuesday night, said the Karnataka Congress leader's health has "deteriorated due to the harassment he was subjected to over the last few days".

The court should take cognizance of Shivakumar's health, he said.

"First Chidambaram and now Shivakumar. Arrests are being made without proper investigation and proper evidence. The BJP is indulging in vendetta politics," Srinivas alleged.

Senior Congress leader and former Karnataka minister D.K. Shivakumar was arrested by the ED here on Tuesday for his alleged involvement in a money laundering case.
