UP minister OP Rajbhar boycotts cabinet meet being held at Kumbh Mela in Prayagraj

Uttar Pradesh minister and BJP ally SPSP chief Om Prakash Rajbhar on Tuesday said he will boycott the state cabinet meet being held at Kumbh Mela in Prayagraj.

In a first, Uttar Pradesh Chief Minister Yogi Adityanath will chair a cabinet meeting of his ministers at the Kumbh Mela in Prayagraj this morning. The meeting, scheduled to at 11 am, will the first outside capital Lucknow for UP ministers.

Rajbhar, who has shown disagreement with several decisions of the UP government, said he will not attend the meeting in Prayagraj.

The Suheldev Bhartiya Samaj Party (SBSP) chief had on Monday accused Yogi Adityanath of "misleading" the country on the Ram temple issue.

The BJP has its governments at the state and the Centre "who has stopped them from building the temple", he said.

Referring to the chief minister's claim during an interview to a channel that the temple issue can be resolved in 24 hours, Rajbhar told reporters: "BJP which is in power at the centre has not been able to find a solution to Ram temple issue in the past five years...what will the chief minister do in 24 hours." "... The party is in power both at the Centre as well as state..who has stopped them from building the temple. Adityanath is misleading the country on the issue," he said.

During the interview, Adityanath had reportedly asked the court to give its verdict soon "or else hand over the issue to us and we will resolve the Ram Janmabhoomi dispute within 24 hours. We won't take 25 hours."

To a question on the candidature of Congress president Rahul Gandhi for the post of prime minister, Rajbhar said he (Rahul) is suitable for the post but in a democratic set up it is the public which is supreme.

"Every body has qualities and Rahul too has them ...the manner in which the present Central government is being run, Rahul will also run it like this," he said.

The minister for Backward Classes Welfare and Department of Disabled People development in the UP government has given the BJP till February 24 to take a decision on his demand of trifurcation of reservation for the OBCs.

"The backward and the deprived sections will support the BSP-SP combine in the coming Lok Sabha elections," he said on Monday.

(With PTI inputs)
