EXPLAINED: What’s driving the infighting in the Madhya Pradesh Congress, and what it means for the party

Jyotiraditya Scindia | Photo Credit: PTI

Key Highlights Scindia, who was made party in-charge of western Uttar Pradesh for the Lok Sabha elections, failed to make a dent in the BJP’s fortunes. He also lost his own Lok Sabha seat Guna in Madhya Pradesh. Scindia has come out in support of the Modi government’s move to end the special status of Jammu and Kashmir.

It’s out in the open. The infighting in the Madhya Pradesh Congress is no longer restricted to whispers, talking off the record to select reporters, or cryptic tweets. When questioned about differences with Kamal Nath, Congress leader Jyotiraditya Scindia minced no words on Wednesday when he told reporters that it was the “chief minister’s responsibility to resolve differences within the party after hearing all sides”.

The immediate provocation for the calculated escalation was the war of words between former Madhya Pradesh chief minister Digvijaya Singh and Umang Singhar, a minister in the Kamal Nath government.

But this public airing of grievances by Scindia suggests deeper fissures in the Congress which will not be easy to mend.

The immediate trigger

Scindia, one of the so-called generation-next leaders of the Congress who lost the race to become chief minister to the wily Kamal Nath after the party’s surprise victory in last year’s Assembly elections, is believed to be eying the post of party president of the Madhya Pradesh unit.

However, Scindia, who lost his Guna seat in the parliamentary elections, claimed on Wednesday that any decision by party president Sonia Gandhi on the appointment of the state party chief would be acceptable to everyone.

That has not stopped political rumour mills from speculating that Scindia, who feels pushed to a corner by the old guard, is considering a future away from Congress.

Scindia has openly supported Singhar, who slammed Digvijaya, accusing the senior leader of running a proxy government in the state. Singhar also alleged that Digvijaya was involved in “liquor trade and illegal sand mining”.

On his part, Scindia endorsed Singhar’s claims, saying: “The issues raised by Umang ji should have been paid attention to.”

“Several Congress leaders have high hopes and are expecting development from the party and the administration,” the former Guna MP said. “There are differences and the government should sit and sort these out.”

Another Scindia loyalist, Ashok Dangi, has warned that he along with hundreds of other Congress workers would resign from the party if Scindia were sidelined from MP politics.

The rifts within

Scindia, who was made party in-charge of western Uttar Pradesh for the Lok Sabha elections, not only failed to make a dent in the BJP’s fortunes in the region but ended up losing his own seat in Madhya Pradesh as well.

The Congress’s disastrous performance in the Lok Sabha elections -- after an equally poor showing in 2014 – appears to have plunged the party into an existential crisis. Sonia Gandhi was forced to again take charge as party president after Rahul Gandhi stepped down from the post after the electoral drubbing.

But that hasn’t stopped the murmurs of discontent and senior leaders from expressing divergent views on issues such as the nullification of Article 370 and the Triple Talaq Bill. Scindia has himself come out in support of the Narendra Modi government’s move to end the special status of Jammu and Kashmir.

Taking to Twitter on August 6, he said: “I support the move on #JammuAndKashmir & #Ladakh and its full integration into union of India.”

The latest rumblings within the Madhya Pradesh Congress are a warning sign that the Congress leadership can ill afford to ignore. The inability to accommodate the genuine aspirations of this generation of Congress leaders, who have worked diligently for the party for more than 10-15 years and also been part of the central government during the UPA-era, could push the party to breaking point.

The views expressed by the author are personal and do not in any way represent those of Times Network.
