Cong party is with you, Sonia tells beleaguered DK Shivakumar

Protests continue

Arrest takes caste hue

BENGALURU: All India Congress Committee (AICC) president Sonia Gandhi, on Thursday, is said to have told DK Shivakumar and his family “not to lose heart”, while offering support to the former Karnataka minister who is currently in custody of the Enforcement Directorate (ED). Sonia’s message came three days after Shivakumar was arrested on charges of money laundering The AICC president spoke to Shivakumar’s MP brother DK Suresh on the phone for about three minutes. She is said to have assured Shivakumar of legal help while accusing the BJP of indulging in a political vendetta by targeting opposition leaders.“The entire party is with you. Don’t lose heart,” she is said to have told Suresh.ED sleuths continued to grill Shivakumar for a sixth day on Thursday. He is lodged at the Tughlak Road police station, where he is likely to be kept for the entire duration of his custody — awarded by a CBI court till September 13.Shivakumar was brought to ED’s headquarters at around 8.30am on Thursday for interrogation and kept there till 9 pm. As per the court’s direction, ED officials allowed friends and relatives to meet Shivakumar after 6 pm when Suresh and Kunigal MLA HD Ranganath met the Kanakapura MLA.Members of Shivakumar’s family — his mother and wife in particular — who were also planning to meet him on Friday, cancelled their visit to Delhi at the last minute. Sources say Shivkumar is mulling to move a higher court to seek bail but is unsure over whether to approach the Delhi high court or the Supreme Court. Suresh on Thursday consulted senior advocate and Congress leader Abhishek Manu Singhvi in this regard.Condemning his arrest, Congress workers and Shivakumar’s supporters continued protests on Thursday too. Protests were held in Ramanagara, Kanakapura, Channapatna, Tumakuru, Mysuru, Chitradurga and other parts of the state. Ramanagara and Kanakapura towns were shut for a second consecutive day, as hundreds of Shivakumar’s supporters took to the streets. Schools and colleges remained closed.Vehicular traffic was disrupted on the busy Mysuru-Bengaluru highway as Congress and JD(S) workers held a rasta-roko. Traffic was blocked in Maddur and Hanakere and vehicles piled up for several kilometers on both sides of the highway.Party workers, who squatted on the highway, shouted slogans against BJP leaders including Prime Minister Narendra Modi. A bandh was observed in Besagarahalli town with shops downing shutters. Similar protests were held in Mandya, Maddur, and Koppa. In Maddur town, former minister and JD(S) MLA DC Tammanna led a rasta-roko on the Mysuru-Bengaluru highway.Congress leader N Cheluvarayaswamy told reporters Shivakumar’s arrest was purely vendetta politics. “Shivakumar was even interrogated on a festival day,” he said. “He made himself available every time the ED summoned him. Arresting Shivakumar is a witch-hunting tactic of BJP leaders.”Leading the protests in Mysuru, former chief minister Siddaramaiah accused the BJP of misusing its power by setting ED, I-T and other central agencies on opposition leaders. In Koratagere, Tumakuru district , former deputy chief minister G Parameshwara led protests.Shivakumar’s arrest has angered Vokkaliga community leaders, who are now planning massive protest next week. Representatives of various Vokkaliga organisations, under the aegis of Vishwa Vokkaligara Okkoot, met in Bengaluru on Thursday and decided to stand by Shivakumar. Karnataka Rakshana Vedike president Narayana Gowda, Vokkaligar Sangha Hitarakshana Vedike president Puttaswamy Gowda, community leader Bharati Shankar and others attended the meeting.
