Mithi River floods Mahim, Matunga tracks; 1500 evacuated in Kurla

Aarey

BMC

Metro car shed

Flooding in Kurla was so severe that 1500 people from Krantinagar had to be evacuated.

Mumbai Rains: Mithi river crosses danger mark,1500 people evacuated from Kranti Nagar, Kurla 02:26

waist-deep water

Photos by Raju Shinde

Photos: Heavy rains wreak havoc once again in Mumbai; roads waterlogged, trains services disrupted 1 17 Linking Road Waterlogged With the local train services hit, harried Mumbaikars who decided to take the road had a tough time. There were long jams on the Western Express Highway and other arterial roads like Linking Road in Khar and Bandra were waterlogged. Photo by Satish Malavade/ BCCL School Kids Stranded in Buses for Hours By the time the administration and the government could announce that in light of the heavy rainfall warning, schools would remain shut, most school children were already in their respective schools. The alert also triggered the process of figuring out how students could safely get back home, even as the rain continued to pelt the city. Some children took more than 5 hours to get home, negotiating waterlogged roads and fighting hunger. Photo by Sachin Haralkar/ BCCL Empty Trains AT CSMT Wait for Green Signal Commuters wait for the resumption of train services on the Central and Harbour Lines. Due to continuous and heavy rains, local train services were suspended between CSMT-Thane on the main line; CSMT-Vadala/Andheri/Goregaon; Vadala-Mankhurd on harbour line and Belapur-Kharkopar on the 4th corridor. Services are running on Mankhurd-Panvel, Thane-Vashi/Panvel, Thane-Kasara/Karjat/Khopoli, Nerul-Khakopar-Nerul. Photo by Deepak Turbhekar/ BCCL Crowd Swells at CSMT With train services disrupted, commuters have no option but to wait it out at the railway station. Train services were disrupted on the harbour line after waterlogging was reported on the tracks between Sion and Kurla. Central services are operating only on some portions of the entire line. CSMT is also a big hub for long distance trains. A number of long distance trains have been cancelled or short-terminated on account of the heavy rains. Photo by Deepak Turbhekar/ BCCL Commuters Stranded on Central Line Tired and weary commuters who have had to brave the rain all day, sit, waiting patiently for services to be restored on the Central and Harbour Lines. This photograph was taken at CSMT. Photo by Deepak Turbhekar/ BCCL People Board Cement Mixer Mumbaikars are desperate to get home after rains lashed the city. Services on the WEstern line were hit after waterlogging was noticed near Mahim and Matunga Road stations. Near Mahim, desperate Mumbaikars hitched a ride on a cement mixer - anything to get an inch closer to home. Photo by Aftab Shaikh/ BCCL The city comes to a standstill People who had already left their homes before the city started flooding are now stuck in the middle of nowhere. Parents are wading with their kids through knee-deep water, and at the same time protecting them from getting drenched. The authorities have even announced that people who have waded through rainwater must visit a doctor and get themselves checked, as a number of diseases can spread during the monsoons. Photo by Sachin Haralkar/BCCL Water enters eatery at Parel Water has started entering into low-lying shops and houses. In Parel, water has entered into an eatery and people have no option but to carry out their work amidst the rainwater. People who are stranded outside are taking shelter in such shops and eateries so that they can atleast have access to food and water for the time being. Photo by Deepak Turbhekar/BCCL Water, water everywhere In Dadar, vehicles were backed up on the flyover as the road ahead was completely flooded. Only the odd truck, assured of its ground clearance ventured into the uncharted waterlogged roads here. The rest preferred to walk in knee-deep water. Photo by Deepak Turbhekar/ BCCL Perennially going under She sums up the state of mind of the average Mumbaikar. Out on work, lugging bags and yet constantly defeated by rains and waterlogging that makes getting home that much more difficult. This picture was taken in Sion. Photo by Sachin Haralkar/ BCCL Central railway services hit Like every other time, this time too the railway tracks between Matunga and Sion stations on the Central line have submerged in the rainwater. This has affected the functioning of local trains and is causing immense trouble to commuters. People are stuck inside the trains with nowhere to go, and railway stations are jampacked due to the crowds. Up and Down fast services have been halted on the Central line. Photo by Sachin Haralkar/BCCL Car submerged at King's Circle Due to heavy waterlogging, a car is half submerged in the rainwater at King's Circle. People have taken shelter at nearby bus stops and under the sheds of shops and buildings in the surrounding areas. This is a common sight at King's Circle every time there is heavy rainfall in the city. Photo by Sachin Haralkar/BCCL Lending a Helping Hand Sion is among the first areas to get waterlogged in the city in a downpour. King's Circle was waterlogged and jammed as a result. Many BEST buses also had to be diverted. Photo by Sachin Haralkar/ BCCL The long walk home For many Mumbaikars who ventured outside their homes this morning, it is likely to be a long way before they get home today. Train services are disrupted on all lines. Western Railways has partially restored services. Photo by Deepak Turbhekar/ BCCL Heavy rains lash Mumbai Heavy downpour in the city has entered its third day today with Mumbai already receiving one-third of the total expected rainfall for the entire month of September. Holiday has been declared for schools. Many parts of the city are immensely waterlogged making it difficult for people to move about. The Indian Meteorological Department has predicted heavy to very heavy rainfall for the rest of the day. Photo by Sachin Haralkar/BCCL Waterlogging at Khar Roads in Khar, particularly in Khar West are heavily waterlogged forcing people to wade through knee-deep water. People who are stranded outside are struggling to return to their homes or at a safer place, but the heavy rainfall is not making it any easier for them. The Khar subway has also been shut. Photo by Lata Mishra/BCCL People wait outside Bandra station People had to wait in a long queue outside Bandra station as vehicles were stuck in the rainwater. Traffic is moving at a snail's pace on roads as well due to waterlogging. The Bandra Linking Road has also been heavily waterlogged. Photo by Satish Malavade/BCCL

Do you still want to cuttrees,As Mithi once again flooded Kurla and parts of Bandra (east) and BKC yesterday, serving a warning to the BMC to not touch trees at Aarey – which serves as a holding pond during heavy rains –it emerged that two independent experts on a panel appointed by the CM to suggest a site forhad voted for Kanjurmarg.The state governmentcontrolled Mumbai Metro Rail Corporation Limited (MMRCL) wants to set up the car shed at Aarey and is willing to sacrifice 2702 trees for the same.Environmentalists and experts have, however, warned that concretisation of Aarey will lead more rain water running off into Mithi, leading to floods.The two experts -- Rakesh Kumar, director, National Environmental Research Institute (NEERI) and Shyam Asolekar, professor, IIT-B’s Centre for Environmental Science and Engineering, had said the recommended either Kanjurmarg or Backbay as ideal sites for the car shed.Mumbai Mirror quoted the same experts in its front page report on Wednesday, warning of a possibility of floods in Chakala and at the international airport.Yesterday, Mithi, combined with a high tide at 3.27 pm, lead to massive flooding of Western Railway tracks at Mahim and Matunga, a first in many years. But it reserved the worst for Kurla, where there was, and parts of Bandra (east) and BKC. So severe was the flooding in Kurla that 1500 people from Krantinagar had to be evacuated.While the hightide was certainly a contributing factor, by BMC’s own admission Mithi had already crossed the danger mark at 1.15 pm. Rakesh Kumar and Shyam Asolekar were the only two independent members of the committee set up by the CM. Everybody else was a government official, more than willing to toe its line.Overwhelmed by government representatives voting for Aarey, the two submitted a dissenting note, which said: “From environmental perspective we are convinced that the Kanjurmarg site and the Backbay site should be investigated further even though it may entail some delay and additional work. The Kanjurmarg site appears to be the best and Backbay site appears to be the second-best among those presented to us at this juncture. We sincerely believe Kanjurmarg and Backbay sites should be evaluated and then a call should be taken. The Aarey land is certainly not suitable due to its ecological significance.”The two experts, in fact, had argued that considering the government’s endeavour to expand Metro’s network, the construction of a car shed at a site like Aarey, which has limited scope for expansion, is not prudent.D Stalin, project director of environmental organisation Vanshakti, which is at the forefront of Save Aarey movement, asked why was the experts’ dissenting note not considered. “All other members on the committee were bureaucrats or financial experts. It is not a surprise that they weighed in with the government. It is precisely for this reason that independent experts are appointed on such panels,” he said.A text message sent to Chief Minister Devendra Fadnavis remained unanswered at the time of going to the press.
