Free dental care for low-income seniors

The Haldimand-Norfolk Board of Health is pleased the province has found a way to deliver free dental care to low-income seniors.

This advertisement has not loaded yet, but your article continues below.

Article content

It just doesn’t like the one-size-fits-all approach the Ministry of Health has adopted.

We apologize, but this video has failed to load.

tap here to see other videos from our team. Try refreshing your browser, or Free dental care for low-income seniors Back to video

The board of health will send a letter to this effect to the ministry. The board doesn’t understand why thinly-populated rural areas such as Haldimand and Norfolk can’t contract with local dentists and hygienists to deliver this program.

Instead, the Ministry of Health expects the Haldimand-Norfolk Health Unit to hire a dentist (half-time), a full-time hygienist, a full-time dental assistant and a program assistant (half-time) and deliver dental services under its auspices.

“This is a really good program for a large urban area,” Windham Coun. Chris Van Paassen told the board Tuesday. “But it would be a more efficient use of dollars to cut a deal with a local dental office.

“I think the province will recognize the rural areas of Ontario and the different way we have of doing things.”

Health units are expected to deliver free dental services to qualifying seniors 65 years of age and older before the end of summer. A report to the board says a single senior with an income of $19,300 a year or less or a senior couple with combined income of $32,300 or less qualify for free dentistry.

Participating dentists and hygienists will perform preventive and restorative procedures as well as deliver diagnostic services.

“This program aims to prevent chronic disease, reduce infections and improve quality of life while reducing (the) burden on the health-care system,” health minister Christine Elliott said in a letter to Mayor Kristal Chopp, chair of the Haldimand-Norfolk Board of Health.
