Karnataka: We are not rejoicing arrest of DK Shivakumar: Karnataka CM BS Yediyurappa

Arrest takes caste hue

ED gets custody of DK Shivakumar till September 13

BENGALURU: On the night of September 3, when Congress troubleshooter DK Shivakumar was arrested by the Enforcement Directorate , the obvious conclusion was that the ruling BJP would press home the advantage and corner the Congress, its main political opponent, on the issue of corruption.Shockingly though, rather than flaying his opponent, chief minister BS Yediyurappa appeared to be seen as backing Shivakumar. “We are not rejoicing the arrest of DK Shivakumar ,” Yediyurappa said. “I only pray that Shivakumar will come out of this unscathed. I have never practised vendetta politics. The law will take its own course in some instances. If he comes out of this, I will be happiest.”Deputy chief minister Govind Karjol echoed Yediyurappa on Wednesday, saying he too was praying for Shivakumar to emerge clean. Senior ministers like Jagaidsh Shettar, R Ashoka, Basavaraj Bommai, V Sommanna, B Sriramulu and Laxman Savadi, also took shelter under the tame “law will take its course” comment rather than go hammer and tongs at the Congress.Party sources say the prime reason for this soft approach was a diktat from Yediyurappa to not “blow up” the Shivakumar case as it may affect the party’s Vokkaliga vote bank which is only now beginning to back the BJP.For the first time, the saffron party made heavy inroads into the Vokkaliga heartland of south Karnataka during the Lok Sabha elections earlier this year, going on to bag 25 of the 28 constituencies in Karnataka. In Mandya, a Vokkaliga-dominated constituency, voters turned their backs on the JD(S) and voted for independent Sumalatha Ambareesh, who was supported by the BJP.With the Lingayat-dominated BJP having managed to “de-stabalise” and “topple” the Vokkaliga- heavy coalition government of Congress-JD(S) only two months ago, Yediyurappa is said to be taking ample precaution to prevent angering the community.Yediyurappa is also said to be acutely aware that former chief minister HD Kumaraswamy, son of HD Deve Gowda, perhaps the tallest Vokkaliga leader, is also in the line of fire in the phone-tapping case — which he handed over to the Central Bureau of Investigation (CBI). Yediyurappa, it is said, fears that aggressive statements would be perceived as a direct attack on the community leadership.Ministers TOI spoke with admitted that the “younger” and “aggressive” members in Yediyurappa’s cabinet were instructed to remain mum. “Further, with the CM himself downplaying the issue, we were forced to remain quiet,” said one minister.The only exception was DyCM CN Ashwath Narayan, who attacked Shivakumar by saying he was “reaping what he sowed”. But this, insiders say, was to better his prospects as a leader of the Vokkaliga community Shivakumar’s arrest has angered Vokkaliga community leaders, who are now planning massive protest next week. Representatives of various Vokkaliga organisations, under the aegis of Vishwa Vokkaligara Okkoot, met in Bengaluru on Thursday and decided to stand by Shivakumar. Karnataka Rakshana Vedike president Narayana Gowda, Vokkaligar Sangha Hitarakshana Vedike president Puttaswamy Gowda, community leader Bharati Shankar and others attended the meeting.There is no need for us to go soft on anyone. The corrupt have no community or caste. They are all the same. We will speak at the right time and place, Tourism minister C T Ravi said.
