Modi govt faced opposition over triple talaq bill but Pakistan mulling making ‘teen talaq’ punishable crime

Pakistan is mulling the option of criminalising 'triple talaq', reports said

Key Highlights Pakistan's Council of Islamic Ideology (CII) has recommended that the act of triple talaq or instant divorce should be deemed as a "punishable crime" Pakistan's Law Minister has reportedly said that as per precedence in Islamic history, the act of triple talaq had been punished in the past. India criminalised the act of 'instant divorce' or 'Triple Talaq' in Muslim community in July 2019.

Islamabad/New Delhi: Narendra Modi government's decision to bring Triple Talaq Bill to criminalise instant divorce in the Muslim community may have faced criticism from the opposition in India but Pakistan - a Muslim majority country - is reportedly mulling the option of criminalising "teen talaq" or "triple talaq".

The Council of Islamic Ideology (CII) in Pakistan has reportedly recommended that the act of triple talaq or instant divorce should be made into a "punishable crime."

A Pakistani news portal reported on Thursday that the CII authorities had informed the National Assembly's Standing Committee on Law and Justice that the divorce is regarded to have taken place if the husband utters the word 'talaq' three times in one breath - even if it's done as a form of a joke.

The CII's recommendation came as a response to a question raised by Member of National Assembly (MNA) Bashir Virk.

The report quoted Pakistan's Federal Law Minister Farogh Naseem as saying that such an act of divorcing one's wife through triple talaq had been punished in the past, as per precedence in Islamic history.

He claimed that the second caliph of Islam, Hazrat Umar (RS) had punished those who had sought instant divorce from their wives. He said, "Therefore, the NA can make laws to make this action a punishable crime."

When asked about the quantum of punishment, CII Chairman Dr. Qibla Ayaz said that the CII was yet to determine that. "If the ministry of law agrees to our suggestion to make it a punishable offense, the punishment can also be determined," Ayaz said.

However, the law minister also cautioned that making the act of triple talaq a punishable offense could result in creating more avenues for the police "to demand bribes."

In a major victory for the Centre, the NDA government was successful in getting the triple talaq bill turned into law in July this year after it was passed in both Houses of the Parliament. The move was regarded as a win for Muslim women's rights.

During the first tenure of the NDA government, the Centre had promulgated a number of Ordinances after it failed to get the legislation passed in Rajya Sabha where the BJP and its allies lacked the required numbers.

However, the Opposition was left in an embarrassing position in July this year when - despite being in majority in Rajya Sabha - it failed to stop the legislation from being passed in Rajya Sabha. Opposition parties such as the Congress and the AIMIM had criticised the bill was harsh and open to misuse.

The Supreme Court of India had rendered the practise of triple talaq “unconstitutional” in 2017.


