KCR ‘image’ on Telangana’s Yadadri temple sparks row; BJP vows to stall installation

Telangana

Lord Lakshmi Narasimha temple

KCR

Telangana movement

BJP

Yadadri temple

Yadadri temple, referred to as Tirupati of, is in the thick of controversy over the carving of chief minister K Chandrashekar Rao’s image and his party’s car symbol along with his pet schemes on the pillars.Theis under complete renovation and expected to be ready for inauguration early next year.plans to perform Maha Sudharshana Yagam, the mother of all yagnams, at the time of inauguration of the temple, by inviting Prime Minister Narendra Modi and others including Vaishnavite seers from across the country.The sculptors are now carving KCR’s image, his TRS party symbol car and his pet schemes and programmes on the asthabhuji prakaram pillars on the southern side. The pillars around the temple have the images of many political and apolitical stalwarts of the country, including former prime ministers — Jawaharlal Nehru to PV Narasimha Rao and several historians besides the history of Telangana and the recent separateThe Bharatiya Janata Party (BJP) and the Congress have taken serious exception to the sculpting of KCR’s image and his party symbol on the pillars. "Temples are not the places for political propaganda. The chief minister should immediately get his images and the party symbols erased from the pillars. Else, Hindus know how to do that job," said's lone MLA in Telangana Assembly, Raja Singh Lodh. He plans to visit the temple on Saturday.BJP Telangana chief spokesperson K Krishna Saagar Rao warned the government of dire consequences saying, "Under no circumstances the BJP will allow these carvings on the walls of. With an unprecedented greed for political legacy, KCR has desecrated Yadadri temple."He further added, "KCR has stooped to an abysmal low for petty political expediency like no one in the history of Indian politics. Etching his own image, other political leaders images, party symbols, government schemes on a Hindu temple pillars is an unforgivable act."Congress MP from Malkajgiri, A Revanth Reddy, took serious exception to the ‘personal propaganda’ of KCR and called for an agitation to force the government to replace the pillars with acceptable ones.Actor-turned-Congress leader Vijaya Shanti also took serious exception to the inscription of KCR’s photo, name and party symbol on the temple that will remain for centuries.Soon after becoming the CM in June 2014, KCR announced big plans to renovate the centuries old temple, on par with Tirumala (Tirupati) Balaji temple in Andhra Pradesh. Entire built in stone, the temple architecture is based on Agama Shashtra. Popular Vaishnavite seer Tridandi Srimannarayana Ramanuja Chinna Jeeyar Swamy provided guidance for the renovation of the temple.Efforts to obtain Yadadri Temple Development Authority (YTDA) vice-chairman and managing director G Kishan Rao proved unsuccessful. A spokesperson of the chief minister’s office chose not to respond to the controversy.
