Amid Heightened Tensions Over Kashmir, Imran Khan, Qamar Bajwa Visit LoC

highlights Imran Khan was also accompanied by defence minister Pervez Khattak.

Khan and Bajwa interacted with troops and met the family members of deceased soldiers.

The visit comes on a day when Pakistan is observing Defence and Martyrs Day today.

New Delhi:

Pakistan prime minister Imran Khan, along with Army Chief General Qamar Javed Bajwa, visited the Line of Control (LoC) on Friday, said a press release issued by the military's media wing Inter-Services Public Relations (ISPR). According to the statement by the ISPR, Khan was also accompanied by defence minister Pervez Khattak, foreign minister Shah Mahmood Qureshi and chairman of the special committee on kashmir Syed Fakhar Imam.

According to reports, Khan and Bajwa interacted with troops and met the family members of deceased soldiers. The visit comes on a day when Pakistan is observing Defence and Martyrs Day today. Pakistan observes the day to mark the anniversary of the 1965 war with India.

This year, the country marked the day in "solidarity" with the people of Kashmir amid heightened tensions between the two neighbours over Modi-government’s decision to abrogate Article 370 which gave special status to Jammu and Kashmir.

Earlier, Bajwa threatened India saying they will fight till last bullet for Kashmir. "We are ready to give sacrifice for our Kashmiri brothers, will fulfill our duty till last bullet, last soldiers and last breath," Bajwa said in a televised speech.

Asserting that Pakistan will never abandon Kashmir, the army chief said 'we are prepared to go till any extent'.

Meanwhile, Pakistan Prime Minister Imran Khan said that his country will make the fullest possible response to India's actions in disputed Kashmir and the global community would be responsible for any "catastrophic" aftermath.

"I have informed the world that Pakistan does not want war, but at the same time, Pakistan cannot remain oblivious to the challenges posed to its security and integrity," Khan said in a statement on the website of state-run Radio Pakistan.

For all the Latest World News, Download News Nation Android and iOS Mobile Apps.
