Hit by low sales, SP Marg traders plan protest with 'closure' banners

ALLAHABAD: As the recent parking ban on vehicles on Sardar Patel Marg 's third lane continues to erode their profit margins, shop owners in Civil Lines have decided to stand up to the government by putting up banners saying 'This shop is on the verge of closure' Tuesday onwards.The group of 300 traders claimed their sales have taken a hit ever since the entry ban was enforced last month. The traffic police announced a ban on parking in SP Marg's third lane. Illegally parked vehicles would be challaned and towed away. On Friday, traffic police challaned 250 vehicles, including 40 cars, in Civil Lines.President of Civil Lines Vyapar Mandal Sushil Kharbanda said, "We decided to do this as we have no other way option to save our business. We would put up banners reading 'This shop is on the verge of closure', due to the traffic police's rigid approach."Kharbanda said the traders would be meeting on Monday and to decided on further course of action. "The regulation has been taking a toll on our businesses and our sales are declining more with each passing day," he added.The shopkeepers also claimed that they had suggested alternatives to the parking ban to regulate traffic movement in one of the most popular markets of the city, but the authorities were not ready to hear their or suggestions"If our approach fails to attract the administration's attention, we would start begging at Subhash Crossing to mark our protest," he added." For over 300 shop owners its a question of survival. If the situation continues, we would be taking tougher decisions in the future," Kharbanda added."We have sought support from other traders' associations. If nothing is done about our problems then we would soon be forced to close our businesses. As there is always a risk of getting an e-challan or getting their vehicles towed away, even our regular customers now avoid coming to our shops," said one of the protesting traders who owns a shop on SP Marg.Traffic police officials on Friday stood firm on their decision to restrict parking on SP Marg's third lane.
