Noida Girl Rides A Bullet: Leads To Hurt Male Egos, Fired Shots & Police Case

It was supposed to be a normal day in Greater Noida’s Milak Khatana village of Jarcha. But as patriarchy would have it, the atmosphere of normalcy was disturbed over a girl riding a motorcycle. Last week, a class 11 student and a local, Ritika Mavi was riding back on her Bullet from a departmental store in the village when she accidentally drove over a few fragile male egos.

When an 18-year-old riding a bike was a problem with men

Ritika had been practicing to ride a motorcycle ever since her father bought a Royal Enfield a year ago. The 18-year-old however ran into trouble with the convervative crowd of her village on August 31st, who had been noticing her riding the bike for sometime now. Two men stopped her and asked her to not ride a bike because she is a woman. She wasn’t going to take it lying down and this turned into a full blown argument.

What exactly happened during and post the argument was narrated to the Times Of India by Ritika’s uncle, Manoj. “They told her it doesn’t look good that a woman was riding a bike and asked her to stop immediately. When she did not budge, they threatened to harm her father,” her uncle informed. “She came home and told us about the incident. But before we could do anything, the men arrived at our house,” he added.

Shots were fired, quite literally

All thanks to Ritika’s father, Suniel who stood up for his daughter and did not pay any heed to the complaints of the men standing in front of him. “I told them that it is our internal matter and our family has no problem with her riding a bike,” he shared. Clearly the girl and her family had ruffled a few feathers by now and the men were not happy about it. Things to an ugly turn when they, Sachin (30) and Kullu (28), and two of their associates took out their guns. “After firing a few shots in the air to threaten me, they went upstairs to find my daughter. They shot at the ceiling as well and fled,” Sunil said in his complaint.

Multiple cases were filed and yet no arrests were made

Despite being warned against going to the police, Sunil dialled 100 for help. The police then lodged a case against the four men under sections 506 (criminal intimidation), 504 (intentional insult with intent to provoke breach of the peace), 323 (voluntarily causing hurt), 352 (assault or criminal force) and 425 (trespass) of the Indian Penal Code, yet no arrests were made.

But that didn’t seem enough because of the previous criminal history of the men. “We were worried that anything could happen to us. In fear, we installed CCTV cameras at the front gate of the house,” said Manoj.

Panchayat jumps in to resolve the issue

When nothing seemed to be happening in terms of resolution, a Panchayat was held on September 5th (Thursday) at the house of the accused. Here, almost 50 men participated and Ritika’s family was asked to accept an apology and withdraw the case against the two men.

“Two men from the family of the accused gave a written apology on behalf of the accused, they have promised us that this will never be repeated again in the future and the village has no problem with girls riding bike. On this condition, we agreed to compromise,” informed Sunil.

Police say that they will still make the arrest

A former pradhan in the village said that, “We have helped the families in resolving the matter; the victims will take the complaint back and the accused persons will not trouble them again.”

Police in Jarcha however have something else on their mind now--“The people in the village shared no information about the panchayat with us, neither did they take permission. The accused are being tracked, they will be arrested soon,” said Anil Kumar, SHO of Jarcha, adding the accused men have a criminal history.

Whatever the case may be, but it was shameful that a woman riding a bullet was even an issue. Apart from all the things that could need the attention of the men and the panchayat, this is what drew their attention. It sadly brings out the underlying bias and patriarchy still prevalent in the society.
