Despite losing Amethi elections, Smriti Irani arranges for mobile hall to screen Vicky Kaushal's URI

A favourite of memes and trolls, Smriti Irani is often in news for some good and most not-so-good-news. The actress-turned-politician, who wanted to do something for Amethi since a long time, ended up doing it recently. The place where Rahul Gandhi’s Lok Sabha constituency exists, does not have a movie hall. That is when Smriti Irani came in action and is the reason why since Republic Day, a ‘mobile digital theatre’ has been screening Vicky Kaushal starrer Uri: The Surgical Strike for the public free of cost.

Smriti Irani had contested the 2014 Assembly elections from Amethi and lost the elections but not her hopes. She now is the brainchild why the screenings are being held at a spice factory in Amethi. The mobile threatre showing the film has been set up by ‘Picture Time’, which is a Delhi-based company.

“There is no working movie theatre in Amethi and there was a demand from the public to view this movie. So Smriti Irani arranged for the screenings and personally addressed the audience through video-conferencing on Republic Day,” said general secretary of the BJP’s youth wing, Vishuv Mishra, adding to Indian Express that the mobile theatre has seats for 150 people, for at least four screenings a day — 9.20 am, 1.30 pm, 5 pm and 8 pm.

The initiative however is not for free. It is being assumed that BJP is trying to garner votes in Amethi, which is the reason behind the gesture. Congress MLC Deepak Singh pointed out that Lok Sabha polls were round the corner and this is just an attempt to get votes. “It is not for the first time that soldiers have shown their courage on the border, but it is the first time someone is trying to take credit of their courage and seek votes in their name. The public of Amethi is aware of the truth and will not be misguided by some movie shows,” he told the daily.

Mishra also hinted out by saying, “Our message is especially to the youth, to tell them about the sacrifices of the country’s soldiers during the surgical strike, which is being propagated as a lie by Congress people. We are sure that the youth of Amethi will do a surgical strike on Congress president Rahul Gandhi by defeating him or any member of his family for the lies that they spread.”

When the first screening was held, Smriti Irani also sent across a special message which said, “Didi (referring to herself) ka to kaam hai sewa karna…Naujawan prerit hon bhartiya sena ke shaurya ko dekh kar, yogdan ko dekh kar, maa bharti ke sapoot kaise ghar baar tyaag kar, apne praano ki aahuti dete hain, yeh is film mein dikhaaya jata hai (It is didi’s job to do service…The youth are encouraged to see the courage and contribution of the Army as the movie shows how sons of the soil sacrifice everything)…”
