India blames Pakistan for Kashmir lockdown

NEW DELHI: India on Saturday blamed the crippling month-long lockdown in held Jammu and Kashmir on Pakistan with India’s National Security Adviser Ajit Doval saying return to democracy depended on “how Pakistan behaves.”

In comments to NDTV news channel, Mr Doval set the pitch for an indefinite assault on civil liberties, alleging that cross border communication intercepts suggested the possibility of a terrorist attacks.

“Pakistan is trying to create a situation of instability so that it can take advantage and people can’t come out, and then it will say people themselves are observing civil curfew,” Mr Doval told NDTV. There have been reports from usually reliable sources of protests and police firing, which New Delhi denies as international media propaganda.

“Communication is very important but not at the cost of human lives. We cannot start mobile (connections) so that terrorists get freedom to communicate,” Mr Doval said.

“We would like to see all restrictions go, but it depends on how Pakistan behaves.

It’s a stimulant and response situation. If Pakistan starts behaving, terrorists don’t intimidate and infiltrate, if Pakistan stops sending signals through its towers to operatives, then we can lift restrictions,” Mr Doval said.

“There are Pakistani communication towers 20 km along the border, and they are trying to send messages. We heard intercepts that told their men ‘how so many apple trucks are moving, can’t you stop them? Should we send you bangles?’,” said Mr Doval, referring to alleged code words for logistics and weapons.

NDTV said four people, including a two-year-old girl, were injured after alleged militants attacked the house of a fruit trader in Sopore for defying their warning to keep their shop shut. The police were quoted as saying that the gunmen were trying to instill fear among people. Mr Doval has asked the authorities to airlift the injured girl to Delhi’s AIIMS.

“We are determined to protect life of Kashmiris from Pakistani terrorists even if we have to impose restrictions. Terror is the only instrument Pakistan has to create unrest,” said Mr Doval. “...230 Pakistani terrorists were spotted, some of them have infiltrated, some arrested.” He denied the army’s involvement in allegation of human rights abuses.

“No question arises of Army atrocities as only the state police and some central forces are handling public order. The Army is there to fight terrorists... I am totally convinced that majority of Kashmiris support the abrogation of Article 370. They see greater opportunities, a future, economic progress and employment. Only a few miscreants are opposing it,” Mr Doval claimed. He said there was no timeframe for the release of political leaders in the state under military occupation.

“Don’t have any time period in place as to how long political leaders will be detained. We don’t want

anyone to get hurt, but things and situation on ground is getting better. We have been very careful about the entire situation. No human right has been violated,” Mr Doval claimed.

Published in Dawn, September 8th, 2019
