Pakistan 'Secretly' Releases Maulana Masood Azhar To Plan Terror Operations Against India: Report

highlights Pakistan planning big action in Sialkot-Jammu and Rajasthan sectors

IB has alerted about the deployment of additional Pak troopers

Maulana Masood Azhar was said to be in protective custody

New Delhi:

Pakistan has "secretly" released Jaish-e-Mohammad (JeM) chief Maulana Masood Azhar to plan terrorist operations against India, a report said quoting Intelligence Bureau (IB) inputs. There were reports after Pakistan had taken Azhar into protective custody after Pulwama car bomb attack in February.

According to a report in Hindustan Times, Pakistan is planning some big operations in Sialkot-Jammu and Rajasthan sectors as a response to India revoking of special status to Jammu and Kashmir.

The report, officials aware of the developments, claimed that Pakistan has released a wanted terrorist to plan and carry out terror operations against India.

IB has alerted the government about the deployment of additional Pakistani troopers along the India-Pakistan border near Rajasthan, the report said.

Pakistan Army chief General Qamar Javed Bajwa on Friday had threatened India saying they will fight till last bullet for Kashmir. "We are ready to give sacrifice for our Kashmiri brothers, will fulfill our duty till last bullet, last soldiers and last breath," Bajwa said in a televised speech.

Asserting that Pakistan will never abandon Kashmir, the army chief said 'we are prepared to go till any extent'.

Meanwhile, Pakistan Prime Minister Imran Khan said that his country will make the fullest possible response to India's actions in disputed Kashmir and the global community would be responsible for any "catastrophic" aftermath.

"I have informed the world that Pakistan does not want war, but at the same time, Pakistan cannot remain oblivious to the challenges posed to its security and integrity," Khan said in a statement on the website of state-run Radio Pakistan.

For all the Latest India News, Download News Nation Android and iOS Mobile Apps.
