SBI safe banking tips: State Bank of India tells customers to stay cautious of fake calls, emails

SBI safe banking tips

Key Highlights There many ways in which tricksters try to deceive the user and get access to their personal and security details It is advisable that bank customers must use the official applications to avoid risks

New Delhi: Technology has made banking facilities quite accessible. Most of the banking functions are available 24X7, at your fingertips using the mobile apps. But with all the advantages that internet banking offers, there are certain risks involved as well.

There many ways in which tricksters try to deceive the user and get access to their personal and security details. It is advisable that bank customers must use the official applications to avoid risks. State Bank of India (SBI), the country's largest bank has cautioned its customers about bogus calls, SMS and emails.

Banks has asked its customers to not share their password, PIN, MPIN or OTP (one-time-password) with any stranger. In case you receive any call asking the same, do not fall into a trap, as the bank never asks such information from their customers. There are instances where customers get calls, SMS or emails saying "You've won a lottery!", "Your card has been blocked!" or "You've got a special bonus!". These messages could be a trap.

According to the State Bank of India official website, "Never respond to any popup, email, SMS or phone call, no matter how appealing or official looking, seeling your personal information such as username, password, mobile number, ATM card details, etc. "

As per the Bank, such communications are sent or created by fraudsters to trick customers into parting with their credentials. Also, it is advisable to not use internet banking if your computer or system is not free of malware such as viruses, trojans, etc.

Bank has offered some secure mobile banking tips-

1. Never open or install any flash player application from unknown sources.

2. Avoid downloading apps from third-party app stores or links given in SMS or emails.

3. Verify app permissions before installing any app.

4. Never grant administrative privileges to any application.

5. If any app is asking for admin privilege then uninstall or delete it immediately.

6. Always keep your mobile operating system (OS) updated.

7. One should always mobile anti-virus software.

Recently, SBI has launched a new facility where a customer can lock net banking access and unlock whenever needed. Bank has introduced this feature keeping the rising internet banking frauds in mind. Locking the net banking account will disable the account as if the user never had the net banking facility.

According to the official website of the State Bank of India, "For better control and security of your account, you can lock or unlock your INB access through link 'Lock & Unlock User' available in Home / Login Page."
