Army warns of potential terror attack in South India after abandoned boats found in Sir Creek

File image of Sir Creek | Photo Credit: BCCL

Key Highlights A terror alert was issued after abandoned boats were recovered from Sir Creek Lt Gen S K Saini, GOC-in-C, Army Southern Command warned of a potential terror attack in South India Air Chief Birender Singh Dhanoa highlighted need to protect air bases in Gujarat in August-end

New Delhi: The Southern Army Commander SK Saini said a terror alert was issued based on intelligence inputs after abandoned boats were found in Sir Creek in Rann of Kutch in Gujarat.

"We have inputs that there may be a terrorist attack in the southern part of India. Some abandoned boats have been recovered from Sir Creek. We're taking precautions to ensure that designs of inimical elements & terrorists are stalled," Lt Gen SK Saini, GOC-in-C, Army Southern Command told the news agency ANI.

The recent terror alert comes close on the heels of a similar intelligence input of a possible attack on Indian Air Force's air bases in Gujarat. Air Chief Marshal Birender Singh Dhanoa highlighted the need for enhanced security in Gujarat while addressing the Commanders’ conference of the South Western Air Command in Gandhinagar.

The intelligence agencies sounded an alert about a possible attack by Pakistan-trained terrorists in the state via sea route. Earlier Gujarat Chief Minister Vijay Rupani said that all steps have been taken to thwart any possible terror attack in the state.

"Kutch is a border district. A high alert has been sounded and the state government has taken it seriously. We have taken all the necessary steps. Everyone is on high alert," Rupani said in Bhuj, the district headquarters, according to news agency PTI.

Coastal installations within the state have been put on a high alert and security has been beefed up at major ports in the state such as Kandla and Mundra. "All vital installations in Kutch district, including Kandla port," Inspector General of Police (Border Range) DB Vaghela said.

The warning comes on the backdrop of an ongoing war-of-words between India and Pakistan over Kashmir. India's decision to abrogate Article 370 has resulted in a knee-jerk reaction from Pakistan which has left no stone unturned in its attempts to garner international support on the matter. Pakistan's frustration has been mounting as most stakeholders in the international community circle refuse to interfere in the matter pertaining to the withdrawal of the special status to Kashmir, what they consider as India's internal matter.
