Indian Army Warns Of Terror Attack In South India After Abandoned Boats Found In Sir Creek

New Delhi :

In view of the Army's warning of a possible terror attack in the southern part of India, an alert has been issued to all districts across Kerala with police officials being directed to intensify vigil and searches.

"An alert has been issued to all districts of the state, following Army's warning of a terror attack. Police across the state have been directed to maintain vigil at public places," Kerala Director General of Police (DGP) Loknath Behera told media on Monday.

Loknath Behera, Kerala Director General of Police (DGP): An alert has been issued to all districts of the state, following Army's warning of a terror attack. Police across the state have been directed to maintain vigil at public places. pic.twitter.com/3zmu6CCIaa — ANI (@ANI) September 9, 2019

READ | India Army Destroys Terrorist Launch Pads Near Leepa Valley In Pak-Occupied Kashmir

Speaking to reporters at an event near Pune, Lieutenant General SK Saini, GOC-in-C of the Army's Southern Command said they have received inputs about a terror attack in southern part of India, adding that some abandoned boats have been recovered in the Sir Creek area.

"We have got many inputs that there may be a terrorist attack in southern part of India and the peninsular India," Saini said. The army has taken measures in the Sir Creek region keeping in mind the enhanced threat perception, he added.

READ | 4 Lashkar Terrorists Trying To Enter India From J-K's Shopian, Plotting Attacks On Army Camps: Sources

In late August too, an alert was sounded in the southern state following intelligence inputs that six members of the banned terror group Lashkar-e-Taiba had infiltrated into neighbouring Tamil Nadu. Police were also asked to keep special vigil at bus stands, railway stations and airports and the places where people gather in huge numbers.

For all the Latest India News, Download News Nation Android and iOS Mobile Apps.
