Didn’t join Congress for lifelong career, says Shashi Tharoor; warns party against vote-bank politics

Congress leader Shashi Tharoor

Key Highlights Congress leader Shashi Tharoor on Monday warned the party against indulging in vote-bank politics Tharoor said that the party should not sacrifice its ideals for a "few more seats"

New Delhi: Congress leader Shashi Tharoor on Monday doled out another advice for the party, saying that it should not sacrifice on its ideals of secularism and inclusiveness only for vote-bank politics.

Justifying his earlier remarks warning Congress against the concept of adopting a ‘Hindutva Lite’ in order to woo Hindi heartland, Tharoor said that he had not joined Congress for a “lifelong career.”

Addressing reporters, Tharoor said, “I didn't come to the Congress party because I had any lifelong career here. I came because I believe it is the best vehicle for the advancement of the ideas of an inclusive and progressive India.”

“We cannot sacrifice those ideas merely for seats or votes,” he further said while talking to reporters at a Youth Congress event in New Delhi today.

His latest comments come in the backdrop of him dismissing the opinion – from both within and outside the party – that the Congress needed to counter BJP’s growth in Hindi heartland by toning down its secularism refrain and shedding the “minority appeasement” tag associated with the opposition party.

In an interview to a news portal ahead of the launch of his new book ‘Hindu Way: An Introduction to Hinduism', the Thiruvananthapuram MP said that Congress would not be able to make any inroads in UP by offering a "Hindutva Lite" like a "Coke Lite" because such a mission would only end up in "Congress Zero."

He said, “As a member of the Congress party, I do believe that the party has a fundamental role -- and a duty to take the lead -- in defending the secular space in India.”

“Those who are suggesting that the answer to the party's woes in the Hindi heartland is to become more like the BJP in 'majority- appeasement' are making a cardinal error: if the voter is presented with a choice between the original article and a pale imitation, he will choose the original every time,” the Congress leader argued.

Tharoor further said, “The loyalist will respect a party that demonstrates the courage of our convictions rather than offering some sort of 'Hindutva Lite'; like 'Coke Lite' and 'Pepsi Zero', 'Hindutva Lite' will only end up with 'Congress Zero’.”


