Military Laser Rangefinder Market 2019 Size, Future Trends, Competitive Analysis and Segments Poised for Strong Growth to 2025 « MarketersMEDIA – Press Release Distribution Services – News Release Dis

Military Laser Rangefinder Market Research Report 2019: Industry Size, Share, Trends, Growth and Opportunity Assessment, Regional Analysis and Segmentation By Product Type (Man-Portable and Vehicle-Mounted), Application (Weapon Guidance and Detection), Range (Up to 15 KM and Over 15 KM) and Region- Forecast till 2025

— The global military laser rangefinder market could increase from the value of USD 530.2 million it achieved in 2016 to reach USD 803.4 million by 2023, says Market Research Future (MRFR). It is set to attain a CAGR of 6.29% during the forecast period (2017-2023).

Elbit Systems Ltd (Israel), Northrop Grumman Corporation (U.S.), Thales Group (France), Saab AB (Sweden), L3 Technologies Inc. (U.S.), Lockheed Martin (U.S.), Safran Electronics & Defense (France), Jenoptik AG (Germany), FLIR Systems Inc. (U.S.), Leonardo S.p.A. (Italy), are the top players in the worldwide military laser rangefinder market. These vendors are highly driven and are focused on innovation as well as advancement that shape the outlook for the market.

Get a FREE Report Sample with Complete TOC @ https://www.marketresearchfuture.com/sample_request/4218

Market Drivers and Top Barriers

Military laser rangefinder systems are used for targeting and enhancing weapon sights for laser-guided missiles, bombs, or precision-guided artillery munitions including the AGM-114 Hellfire anti-tank missiles or Paveway series of bombs. These portable devices are utilized by the special forces, armed forces and forward air controllers (FAC) and they include an optical sight as well as a laser emitter. These could vary in size and are generally mounted on tripods for a stable aiming platform. With time, military laser rangefinders have turned into an integral component within the defense industry.

There has been a host of technological advancements in military laser rangefinders. At present, several companies like Northrop Grumman, Thales Group and BAE Systems are making considerable investments in military laser rangefinders; which is expected to accelerate market growth. Moreover, advancements in laser-guided weapons, emergence of safe laser rangefinders, modernization of warfare, and manufacturing of lightweight laser rangefinders are stimulating market growth to a great extent.

The integration of laser rangefinders in unmanned aerial vehicles (UAV) coupled with market penetration in developing countries is raising the market potential. However, health concerns associated with laser rangefinders could slow down the market growth in the coming years.

Market Segmentation

The Military Laser Rangefinder Market has been categorized with respect to application and type.

Application-based segments in the market are weapon guidance application and detection application.

Type-wise, the segments are man-portable (carried by soldiers) type and vehicle-mounted type.

Regional Outlook

North America, Asia Pacific, Middle East and Africa and Europe are the main markets for military laser rangefinder across the globe.

In 2016, North America held one-third share of the worldwide market for military laser rangefinders market, which established its dominance over other regions. The presence of well-known manufacturers as well as the region’s huge allocations to homeland security and defense works in favor of the market. The region could expect to retain its lucrative status in the global market in the coming years, backed by massive investments and rapid technological advancements in defense technologies. In addition, expanding military expenditure on miniature military rangefinders by the US Department of Defense (DoD) has given significant boost to the market. Renowned companies like Northrop Grumman Corporation, FLIR Systems Inc. and Lockheed Martin Corporation are making huge efforts to uplift their position and also expand their customer base, which could work in favor of the regional market in the ensuing years.

Asia Pacific along with Middle East & Africa market are presumed to grow at a faster rate compared to other regions. The market growth in these regions is the result of increasing military funds on advanced technologies that help counter and also mitigate rising border conflicts as well as terrorist activities. Middle East and Africa, in particular, is ranked among the top crucial areas in the world, in terms of regional security, critical natural resources and conflicts.

Key Insights

• Market sizing, forecast, and analysis: detailed coverage of the market segment and sub-segments

• Regional/country trends and forecast: detailed analysis of the market in North America, Europe, Asia-Pacific, Middle East & Africa, and Latin America, along with key countries in each region

• Market dynamics intelligence: market drivers, opportunities, trends, restraints, Porter’s five forces, supply chain, and value chain analysis

• Technology trends, regulatory landscape, and patent analysis outlook

• Competitive intelligence: market share analysis, financial analysis, product benchmarking, and strategic developments including joint ventures, product launches, and mergers & acquisitions

• Regional attractiveness and related growth opportunities

Browse Complete Report "Military Laser Rangefinder Market Research Report Information - Global Forecast to 2025" @ https://www.marketresearchfuture.com/reports/military-laser-rangefinder-market-4218

List of Tables

Table 1 List of Assumptions

Table 2 Major Patents Granted for Military Laser Rangefinder Market (15 May 2010–15 May 2019)

Table 3 Platform: Global Military Laser Rangefinder Market, 2018–2025 (Usd Million)

Table 4 Product Type: Global Military Laser Rangefinder Market, 2018–2025 (Usd Million)

Table 5 Technology: Global Military Laser Rangefinder Market, 2018–2025 (Usd Million)

Table 6 Global Military Laser Rangefinder Market, by Region, 2018–2025 (Usd Million)

Table 7 North America: Military Laser Rangefinder Market, by Country, 2018–2025 (Usd Million)

Table 8 North America: Military Laser Rangefinder Market, by Product Type, 2018–2025 (Usd Million)

Table 9 North America: Military Laser Rangefinder Market, by Application, 2018–2025 (Usd Million)

Table 10 North America: Military Laser Rangefinder Market, by Range, 2018–2025 (Usd Million)

Continued........

List of Figures

Figure 1 Market Synopsis

Figure 2 Global Military Laser Rangefinder Market: Market Attractiveness Analysis

Figure 3 Global Military Laser Rangefinder Market Analysis, by Product Type

Figure 4 Global Military Laser Rangefinder Market Analysis, by Application

Figure 5 Global Military Laser Rangefinder Market Analysis, by Range

Figure 6 Global Military Laser Rangefinder Market Analysis, by Region

Figure 7 Global Military Laser Rangefinder Market: Market Structure

Figure 8 Research Process of Mrfr

Figure 9 North America: Market Size & Market Share, by Country, 2018 Vs 2025

Figure 10 Europe: Market Size & Market Share, by Country, 2018 Vs 2025

Continued........

Ask for your specific company profile and country level customization on reports.

Contact Info:

Name: Abhishek Sawant

Email: Send Email

Organization: Market Research Future

Address: Market Research Future, Office No. 524/528, Amanora Chambers, Magarpatta Road, Hadapsar, Pune -411028, Maharashtra, India

Phone: 6468459312

Website: https://www.marketresearchfuture.com/reports/military-laser-rangefinder-market-4218

Source URL: https://marketersmedia.com/military-laser-rangefinder-market-2019-size-future-trends-competitive-analysis-and-segments-poised-for-strong-growth-to-2025/88917134

Source: MarketersMedia

Release ID: 88917134
