Police on alert after terror warning

Officials say no immediate cause of panic as army advisory does not convey a sense of urgency

A warning from the Indian Army about a possible terrorist attack in south India has prompted the Kerala Police to put themselves on a high alert on the eve of the Onam festival.

Top officials told The Hindu that the cautionary report lacked specifics and could be based broadly on the intelligence generated by the Army following the reported sighting of two abandoned non-native fishing boats near Gujarat coast recently.

They said there was no immediate cause for panic and the Centre’s advisory did not convey a sense of urgency as interpreted widely.

Onam season

However, the police were not taking any chances given the busy Onam shopping season and have upped security checks at airports, railway stations, bus terminals, crowded markets and shopping malls.

They also verified lodges, hotels and home-stays to ensure that no unknown person had checked in recently.

The Easter Day bombings in Sri Lanka, the recent developments in Jammu and Kashmir, and unconfirmed reports about the release of alleged terrorists in Pakistan had prompted Central security agencies to embrace an enhanced threat perception.

The police were also acutely aware of the threat of homegrown terrorism inspired by the seductive global propaganda of the Islamic State.

The National Intelligence Agency had in April claimed to have thwarted a domestic terrorist plot with the arrest of a radicalised youth from Palakkad.

Coastal alert

The Kerala Police had sounded a coastal alert in May following an intelligence report that 15 people with ties to the Islamic State (IS) have left Sri Lanka in a “white boat” bound for the Lakshadweep and Minicoy islands, 400 km off Kochi. However, little came of the warning.

T.N. warning

More recently in August, the State police had upped their guardedness after their counterparts in Tamil Nadu warned them that a set of armed ultras inspired by the Islamic State were at large in south India.

The information led to the detention of a youth in Thrissur in what later transpired to be an embarrassing case of mistaken identity caused by wrong intelligence.
