8 People Involved With Lashkar-e-Taiba Terror Module Arrested From J-K's Sopore

New Delhi :

As many as 8 persons involved with terror module of Pakistan-based Lashkar-e-Taiba outfit have been arrested from Jammu and Kashmir's Sopore, Kashmir Zone Police said on Monday. A preliminary investigation has been launched in connection to the incident and the individuals are being interrogated.

"Terror module of Lashkar-e-Taiba outfit involving 8 individuals arrested in Sopore," Kashmir Zone Police told news agency ANI, adding that the investigation is under progress.

Kashmir Zone Police: Terror module of Lashkar-e-Taiba outfit involving 8 individuals arrested in Sopore. Investigation under progress. #JammuAndKashmir pic.twitter.com/MxhxrOCaQy — ANI (@ANI) September 9, 2019

Earlier in the day, there were reports of 4 Lashkar terrorists planning to carry out attacks on camps of Indian Army and other security establishment along international border in Jammu and Kashmir. Sources said the terrorist might make attempts to attack on Bari Brahmana camp in Samba district and Sunjwan and Kaluchak Army camps in Jammu region, adding that the infiltrtion bid is on through Jammu and Kashmir's Shopian district.

However, there is no clarity yet on whether the group of eight people abducted by the Kashmir Zone Police has any connection with these plotting of attacks on security establishments across the Line Of Control (LoC).

READ | Indian Army Warns Of Terror Attack In South India, Sounds Alert Across Kerala

Meanwhile, an alert has also been issued to all districts across Kerala in view of the Army's warning of a possible terror attack in the southern part of India. Police officials have been asked to intensify vigil and searches at bus stands, railway stations and airports and the places where people gather in huge numbers.

There have been a sharp rise in infiltration activities following Indian government's decision to abrogate Article 370 of the Constiution, stripping the special status to Jammu and Kashmir and bifurcating the state into two Union Territories - Jammu and Kashmir and Ladakah.

READ | 'Stop Atrocities': PoK Residents Protest Against Pakistan Army, Seek Help From World Community

However, the Indian Army has maintained that if Pakistan continues with its disruptive course, the Indian side will respond with resolve and the costs will be prohibitive for them.

For all the Latest India News, Download News Nation Android and iOS Mobile Apps.
