Hindu Radicals Demand Death for Organizers of Christian Film Screening in India

(International Christian Concern) –According to Morning Star News, around 100 Christians were attacked by Hindu radicals on August 23 for watching the Christian film “He Will Come Again” in the home of a Christian woman in Jamalpur village, located in India’s Bihar state. The screening of the Christian film caused Hindu radicals to not only attack the local Christians, but also demand the deaths of the Christian leaders that organized the screening.

Morning Star News reports, that with about 10 minutes left in the film, a man stood up in front and beginning shouting, “Who is the operator here? Who is the operator here?” The man then demanded the volume of the film be reduced to a level that it was no longer audible.

After being confronted by one of the organizers of the screening, the disruptive man left. However, he returned when the film concluded with at least 15 other Hindu villagers carrying swords, bamboo poles, and wooden sticks. Local Christians then locked the organizers of the film inside the Christian home for their own safety.

“The batch of Hindu villagers abused them with filthy language, scattered the congregation, and besieged the house,” Immanuel Tirkey, one of the organizers, told Morning Star News. “Soon a mob of 250 angry, upper-caste Hindus showed up with lathis and steel rods.”

The mob surrounded the Christian home and demanded that the organizers of the film screening be released to them. According to Morning Star News, the mob said that they would kill the organizers because they were converting Hindus to a foreign faith.

As the siege of the Christian home continued, local authorities were called to the scene. Police officers were able to disperse the mob, but local Christians continue to report feeling under threat.

Across India, attacks on Christians and their places of worship continue to rise in frequency and severity. Many claim the rise of the Hindu nationalist Bharatiya Janata Party (BJP) has encouraged the activities of Hindu radicals and increased levels of religious intolerance across India.

Check out the ICC post HERE
