Four LeT men targetting Army camps: Intelligence agencies

Pakistan-based terrorist outfit Lashkar-e-Taiba (LeT) is planning to carry out attacks on camps of Indian Army and other security forces in Jammu and Kashmir. Sources in intelligence agencies told that four LeT terrorists are involved in plotting attacks on security establishment.

According to the sources, the terrorist might make attempts to carry out attacks on Bari Brahmana camp in Samba district, and Sunjwan and Kaluchak Army camps in Jammu region.

There are also reports of terrorists planning to infiltrate through Shopian area and later reach Jammu.

Last week as many as 50 infiltrators were waiting near the Line of Control (LoC) to enter India. The revelation was made by two Pakistani terrorists, who were arrested from Gulmarg.

Sources had told that Pakistan Army was using its posts at Johli, Bargi and New Baathla along the LoC in order to help terrorists infiltrate inside India. The terrorists were waiting at Kacharban launching pad.

Intelligence agencies sources had also told that Pakistan's ISI had ordered terror groups operating in Kashmir valley to target religious places. The nefarious plan of ISI was revealed after the interception of messages between terrorists and their Pakistan-based handlers.

Sources had said that ISI's main aim was to create tension Kashmir Valley and instigate people of the region against security forces stationed in Kashmir to maintain law and order.

The government and the Indian Army have maintained that Pakistan has been making repeated attempts to infiltrate maximum terrorists in Jammu and Kashmir.

Meanwhile, Indian Army on Monday released a video of a failed infiltration attempt by a Border Action Team (BAT) of Pakistan along the Line of Control in Keran sector of Jammu and Kashmir,

In the video, the bodies of the eliminated BAT personnel can be seen lying on the ground along with their equipment. According to Army, the infiltration bid by the BAT personnel took place in the first week of August.

It may be recalled that few days ago the Army had said that four bodies of possibly BAT personnel or some terrorists had been located along the LoC inside the Indian territory.

Zee Media Newsroom
