Desperate for international attention, Pakistan’s ISI meets terror groups to plan attacks across India

After Islamabad's efforts to internationalise Kashmir were snubbed on all fronts by the international community, Pakistan is now trying to draw international attention on the issue as it plans terror attacks in India with the help of terrorist groups.

Pakistan's Inter-Services Intelligence (ISI) held a high-level meeting with terror groups in Islamabad to chalk out a plan to carry fresh attacks in Jammu and Kashmir and other parts of India.

As per an Intel report, terror groups Jaish-e-Mohammed (JeM), Lashkar-e-Taiba, Hizbul Mujahideen and Khalistani Zindabad Force (KZF) met in Islamabad and discussed plans to carry out activities against India.

The meeting was facilitated by ISI at a safe house of the Pakistan Army, says the report, which has been accessed by India Today TV.

"Pakistan-based terrorist outfits organised a closed-door meeting in Islamabad on Kashmir situation which was attended by prominent commanders of terror groups including Hizbul Mujahideen, LeT, JeM and KZF," the intel report states.

During the meet, the terror groups decided to set up activities and carry out attacks, the report adds.

Khalistani elements planning protests in US, UK

As per inputs, pro-Khalistani organisations are planning a joint protest with the support of Kashmiri separatist elements in the US and UK against India.

Sources in the intelligence agencies said the ISI also met Ranjit Singh Neeta of the Khalistan Zindabad, a pro-Khalistani terror group, and asked him to activate his channel in Jammu for attacks in India.

After being snubbed at various international fora, ISI is now seeking the help of terror groups to create tension and incite violence in India. Sources say the intention is not only to create problems in the Kashmir Valley but also draw international attention.

Also read | Over 50 terrorists waiting to enter India with Pakistan army's help, reveal arrested Lashkar terrorists
