JI warns govt against Kashmir bifurcation

LAHORE: The Jamaat-i-Islami has warned the government and Kashmiri leadership against the US and Indian designs on bifurcating Kashmir.

“Washington wants division of the disputed region on a permanent basis, while turning Pakistan into a desert by blocking its waters from western rivers is the desire of New Delhi,” said JI chief Sirajul Haq at a “Kashmir Solidarity Convention” in Model Town here on Monday.

A large number of people from all walks of life attended the event.

Senator Siraj said those who thought US President Donald Trump’s mediation would offer a viable solution to the Kashmir issue were actually living in a fool’s paradise.

He said the people of Kashmir and Pakistan would never accept any settlement of the Kashmir issue in violation of the UN resolutions.

He criticised the rulers for what he said making hollow claims of lending support to the Kashmiris suffering at the hands of occupying Indian forces.

“The rulers are only making tall claims that they will fight for Kashmir till last bullet and last breath but practically they have taken not a single step in support of the besieged people.”

The incapability and cowardice of the present and past governments was the only hurdle in solution to the Kashmir issue, he said.

“Mere proclaiming that Tipu Sultan is one’s hero is not enough. The prime minister should practically act like the great Muslim warrior,” he said, referring to a tweet of PM Imran Khan.

The JI chief expressed concerns over reports of shortage of food and medicines in the Indian Occupied Kashmir.

“There has been curfew and communication blockade coupled with worst human rights violation in held Kashmir for more than a month but Islamabad and the internationally community are acting as silent spectators,” he lamented.

He urged the government to avoid creating any issue on the internal fronts until the solution to Kashmir issue, and called for severing all trade and transport links with India.

He demanded abolition of the Simla Agreement, signed in the 1970s, and establishment of a shadow parliament in AJK with full representation of the people of IOK and Kashmiri diasporas.

He announced that the JI would organise a Kashmir Solidarity March in Lahore on Oct 6.

Published in Dawn, September 10th, 2019
