Kashmir clampdown: Apple crops rot as farmers struggle to sell produce

Apple farmers in Kashmir struggle to take their produce to market due to clampdowns during peak season (File photo | India Today)

The clampdown in Kashmir, implemented before the abrogation of Article 370 over a month ago, continues to hurt the livelihoods of locals. The Kashmiri economy has been suffering from the shutdown since the past 37 days as markets remain shut, leaving traders and direct and indirect employees in the lurch.

However, the more lasting impact of the shutdown is likely to come with poor sales of Kashmiri apples, which are in season.

Apple cultivation is one of the mainstay of Kashmir’s economy with revenue of around Rs 1, 200 crore a year. With the clampdown and the unrest that has been there for the last 37 days, the Kashmiri apple trade has been hit severely.

Usually, by this time, traders start picking their apples and pack them for the markets in other parts of the country. However, due to the current situation, finding a buyer as well as transporting these apples has become a major issue.

Sapore, which is one of the biggest fruit mandis in north Kashmir, has been shut since the clampdown. The mandi is the focal point of Kashmir apple trade as most of the crops are sent here and then transported to the rest of the country.

An apple farmer from north Kashmir, Abdul Rasheed is worried that his crop will rot this year

It is difficult this time. We have our early produce ready but we haven’t been able to send it. The mandi [market] is closed. The crop is lying with us. Some of it will go waste, Abdul Rasheed told India Today TV.

Even the truck drivers, who managed to reach the mandi haven’t been able to transport anything out. We are here since last few days, but we haven’t been able to do anything, said a truck driver.

Fruit vendors selling apples during relaxation in clampdown in Kashmir's Srinagar on August 17 (PTI photo)

Militant threat

The apple farmers face a multi-prong threat as the government-imposed restrictions were not their only concern. The farmers have also been threatened by the militants against doing any trade.

In Sopore, an apple farmer Mohammed Ashraf Dar and his family, including a five-year-old daughter, were shot at by terrorists for defying the diktat of not doing business.

Centre offers direct procurement

The government has said that they have tied up with the National Agricultural Cooperative Marketing Federation of India Ltd (NAFED), which has agreed to buy Kashmiri apple directly.

Ministry of Home Affairs (MHA) said that the NAFED would lead the procurement efforts and complete the entire process through designated state government agencies by December 15.

The ministry of home affairs and agriculture will oversee the smooth implementation of the process.

In a statement, MHA said, "Procurement will be made directly from genuine apple growers. All categories of apples, that is, A, B and C will be procured from all the apple-producing districts in Jammu and Kashmir as well as designated mandis in Sopore, Shopian and Srinagar."

Several apple farmers, India Today TV spoke to, said that the Centre's offer of direct procurement was welcome but it may not be enough.

The farmers are worried about they will not be able to transport their goods to government procurement agencies.

Abdul Rehman Dar, the farmer, said: "Sapore mandi has refused to take our produce. If the government says that it will come at our doorstep and purchase goods from us then it is good."
