Amit Shah to Northeast: Revival of citizenship bill won't affect Article 371

'Citizenship bill will have 2014 as cut off'

GUWAHATI: Indicating that the Centre may revive the Citizenship (Amendment) Bill, Union home minister Amit Shah said on Monday that the proposed legislation would not affect the special provisions for states in the northeast under Article 371.Shah said the citizenship bill would also not be in conflict with existing laws pertaining to safeguarding the identities, cultures and customs of the indigenous people of the region.At the fourth conclave of the BJP-led North East Democratic Alliance (Neda) here, Shah told the chief ministers of eight north-east states, including Sikkim, that the proposed citizenship bill will not be in conflict with the inner line permit (ILP) legislation in force in some states in the region. Inner line permits are required for outsiders to enter Arunachal Pradesh Nagaland and Mizoram "Fears have been raised by northeast states about what will happen to the special provisions under Article 371 or the ILP legislation if the citizenship bill is brought in. I want to reiterate that Article 371 has no relation to Article 370. Article 371 is a permanent arrangement while Article 370 is temporary in nature. The citizenship bill that the Centre is contemplating will not affect Article 371 or the laws that protect the identities of the people of the north-east," Shah assured the CMs.The citizenship bill envisages giving citizenship to persecuted non-Muslim minorities from Bangladesh, Pakistan and Afghanistan who have taken shelter in India. The bill, passed by the Lok Sabha in January amid large-scale protests in the north-east, including by many NDA allies, lapsed after it was not placed in the Rajya Sabha. The protesters had argued that the bill would threaten the identities of the indigenous people of the north-east as the states would be swamped by migrants, especially from Bangladesh.Shah said concerns have also been expressed on whether migrants from other countries would be allowed to keep coming in to seek citizenship. "I want to reassure the people of the north-east that people will not keep coming for citizenship without any interruption. The citizenship bill being contemplated by the Centre has December 31, 2014 as the cut-off date. We are very clear about the cut-off date. I am happy that the issue was raised at the Neda conclave," the home minister said.The citizenship bill and the National Register of Citizens (NRC) were raised at the conclave by the CMs of Meghalaya, Nagaland and Mizoram.Meghalaya CM Conrad Sangma said conditions for dialogue with stakeholders should be created to find solutions to issues related to the citizenship bill in such a way that the interests of the northeastern states and their people are not hampered.Nagaland CM Neiphiu Rio said the threat of demographic change in the north-east due to the citizenship bill should be taken into serious consideration and the proposed legislation must not affect the interests of the region at any cost.Mizoram CM Zoramthanga, however, took an entirely different approach and said the north-east should be excluded from the purview of the proposed CAB.Later in the day, Neda convener and Assam finance minister Himanta Biswa Sarma said the CMs of all eight states met Shah after the conclave to discuss the citizenship bill. "The Union home minister assured them that no laws or provisions that protect the identities, cultures and customs of the region will be affected by the citizenship bill. The CMs informed the home minister that they will hold consultations with stakeholders in their respective states on the proposed citizenship bill and will meet him soon," Sarma said.
