Rally for DK Shivakumar, nightmare for you

DK Shivakumar

Vokkaliga community

rally

ED

Bengaluru City Police

.

Traffic Diversions



DKS TWEETS VOTE OF THANKS



35,000 expected to participate. Traffic police issues advisory for blocked roadsAfter the arrest of former minister, thein the city will be holding a protest against the arrest from 11.30am near Basavangudi National College grounds today. The protestwill start from the National College grounds to Governor’s residence. 35,000 people from the Vokkaliga community are expected to be participating in the protest rally today.Protestors allege that the BJP government is playing cheap tricks which has led to the arrest of Shivakumar. They have accused the Union Minister Amit Shah for the arrests of DK Shivakumar. The protestors are also staging this rally saying that DK Shivakumar was not even allowed to celebrate Ganesha Chaturthi festival at his residence and is being tortured by the. The protest is expected to begin at 11.30 am and go on till 3 pm. The protestors are expected to flock from various parts of the city and State.Several schools in the Central Business District have sought police protection, but schools have not declared any holiday due to the rally (a few schools have declared holiday for Onam well in advance). D Shashi Kumar, general secretary of Karnataka Associated Managements of English Medium Schools (KAMS) said, “We will not be declaring holiday for schools. Thehas not issued any directive about keeping school shut on Wednesday.”The city police have made elaborate security arrangements with 90 platoons of State Reserve Police and Armed Reserve Police along with 10,000 police personnel to maintain law and order during the protest rally. On Tuesday, the city police commissioner, Bhaskar Rao told the media that around 5,000 policemen will be deployed during the protest march. “Additionally, 50 platoons of Karnataka State Reserve Police, 40 platoons of City Armed Reserve and 550 home guards will be deployed during the protest.The arrangements will be monitored by 11 Deputy Commissioners of Police (DCP), 42 Assistant Commissioners of Police, 106 police inspectors, 373 sub inspectors and 2,280 police constables. Over 500 temporary CCTV cameras will be fixed across the stretch and police in plain clothes will shoot the entire episode in handy cameras,” he said. Rao said that as precautionary measures they have warned that strict action would be taken against protestors if they are found violating the guidelines and rules laid down by the city police.“We have clearly warned them that if something goes wrong, they will be held responsible. If any untoward incident is reported, we will first arrest the organisers and then search for the miscreants. Usage of provocative messages and speeches, loud music and forcing shop owners to shut shop or any kind of violent protest or burning effigies will not be tolerated and will be dealt with strictly,” he said.Vehicles coming from KG Road to take right at Elite junction to join Tank Bund road. Vehicles coming from Chalukya circle to take left at Maharani’s College Bridge and continue from KR Circle.Vehicles on Seshadri road take upper ramp at Anand Rao circle, take JDS cross and continue on Race Course Road.Devanga junction - Subbaiah circle - Poornima junction - Lalbagh main entrance - Lalbagh west entrance and continue from town hall.Vehicles coming from Richmond circle take left at Hudson circle and join Devanga junction.Hudson circle - Police corner - Enter Cubbon Park - Fish Canteen - KR Circle - Old post office Road.CTO circle - police Thimmaiah circle - Ambedkar Road - KR Road.Seshadri road - Race Course Road - Chalukya circle - Old High Grounds police station junction - Raj Bhavan junction - Coffee Board and continue through Infantry road.* DK Shivakumar has tweeted, “I wholeheartedly thank leaders, supporters, well-wishers and friends who have organised a massive protest in my support in Bengaluru”* I humbly request that the protest be peaceful and doesn’t cause any inconvenience to citizens. Please ensure public property isn’t harmed.* I would like to reiterate that I have done nothing wrong and am a target of vendetta politics.* With the support and blessings that I am receiving from all of you, and my belief in god and our judiciary, I have full faith that I will emerge victorious both legally and politically.
