The Family Man Cast: Who plays whom in Manoj Bajpayee’s upcoming Amazon Prime original series

Just so you know, The Family Man is the next crime-thriller series we are all about to binge-watch. An Indian Amazon Prime Original, this show marks the debut of legendary actor Manoj Bajpayee into the world of web series.

It tells the story of a man named Srikant, who basically leads a double life. From one perspective, his life is as ordinary as the person sitting next to you. But fall a little deeper into the rabbit hole and things are not as they seem. For he seems to be a spy working to save Mumbai from an impending terror threat, titled Operation Zulfikar.

It seems like crime-thrillers are all the rage in today’s day and age. And the ones that have stories of how a hero cop saves the world, just like Sacred Games, are absolute winners. By that logic, The Family Man has the perfect formula to gain a cult following just like the aforementioned show. But what seemingly sets it apart, is that the trailer promises some giggles as well as some serious action scenes. And while Sacred Games’ ensemble cast was unbeatable, we have no doubts about the acting chops of actors like Bajpayee, along with Priyamani, Gul Panag and the others.

While the trailer has been out for some time now, there is still a little bit of curiosity of what exactly the show is going to bring to the table. While we may not know much about it as yet, just like you, we do have a clue about what every actor is going to be doing in the web series. Check it out:

The Family Man cast: Who plays whom in the Amazon Prime Original Show?

Manoj Bajpayee as Srikant

In his first venture into the world of web series, Manoj Bajpayee will have two lives. One of a seemingly normal middle class government employee, who is trying to find the balance between work and family life. And the other secret life of a Spy, working as a senior analyst with the National Investigation Agency (NIA). His job is to protect the city from all security threats. From his social media posts, our guess is that the NIA on this show is called the TASC Force.

Priyamani as Suchitra
