Maharashtra Police cites The Sky is Pink trailer to warn citizens against robbery, Priyanka Chopra says 'Oops'

Maharashtra Police tweet still from The Sky Is Pink trailer | Photo Credit: Twitter

Key Highlights After The Sky Is Pink dropped online, Maharashtra Police recently took to Twitter to warn citizens against committing robbery While Priyanka Chopra responded to their tweet and said, "Oops!", Farhan said that he is "never planning heists on camera again" Directed by Shonali Bose, The Sky Is Pink is slated to arrive in cinemas on October 11

Of all her fans from across the world, admirers of Priyanka Chopra back in India had been desperately waiting for her comeback to Bollywood. Last seen in the Hollywood movie Isn't It Romantic, Priyanka was apparently on a hiatus from Hindi cinema for over 3 years. The last Hindi movie the 37-year-old actress was seen in was Prakash Jha's Jai Gangaajal (2016).

Priyanka is now set to reclaim her crown as ever since the trailer of The Sky is Pink dropped online yesterday, her fans have not been able to stop gushing about the global icon. The movie would see her reuniting with her Dil Dhadakne Do co-star Farhan Akhtar and going by the 3-minute long promo, their on-screen chemistry is eagerly making us look forward to the forthcoming flick.

However, soon after the trailer made its way onto the internet yesterday, Maharashtra Police seized the opportunity to warn citizens against robbery and make them aware of the punishment for the crime. Sharing a still from the trailer, the particular scene in which PeeCee jokes about robbing a bank with Farhan, who plays her husband in the movie, Maha Police tweeted, "Seven years imprisonment with fine under IPC Section 393 #ColoursOfLaw #TheSkyIsPink @priyankachopra @FarOutAkhtar."

Priyanka responded to the tweet and said, Oops caught red handed… time to activate Plan B @FarOutAkhtar! #TheSkyIsPink.(sic)" Farhan replied to the tweet as well and posted, "Hahaha never planning heists on camera again @priyankachopra #TheSkyIsPinkTrailer." Check out the fun Twitter exchange below.

Directed by Shonali Bose, who has previously helmed Margarita With A Straw, The Sky Is Pink is scheduled to hit the theatres on October 11, 2019. The film, based on the love story of the parents of Aisha Chaudhary, also stars Zaira Wasim and Rohit Suresh Saraf.

Stay tuned to zoomtv.com for more updates.
