In the shadow of 9/11: For India, Pakistan-sponsored terror has been the main challenge since 2001

The 26/11 Mumbai terror attack | Photo Credit: PTI

Key Highlights The attack on the Indian Parliament was carried out by the LeT and JeM, both Pakistan-based terror groups On 29 October 2005, Pakistan-trained terrorists targeted New Delhi two days before Diwali In one of the deadliest attacks targeting paramilitary forces, a car bombing killed 40 CRPF jawans in Kashmir’s Pulwama district on 14 February 2019

The 9/11 attacks and the US-led war on terror that followed have in many ways shaped the defence and geo-political strategies of major world powers in the first two decades of the millennium. India is no exception to this general trend, but in India’s case, the terror threat has emanated almost entirely from one country in its immediate neighbourhood – Pakistan.

To be sure, with the continuing war in Afghanistan and fresh doubts over the willingness of the Trump administration to strike a peace deal with the Taliban, the conflict could once again provide fertile ground for transnational terrorist and jihadi organisations such as the Al Qaeda and Islamic State to consolidate their positions.

In such a situation, the Indian security and defence establishment may have to expand the scope of its intelligence and counter-terror operations. So far, however, Pakistan continues to be the main focus for India’s counter-terror strategies.

These are some of the major terror attacks carried out by Pakistan-based groups on Indian soil after 2001:

2001: Indian Parliament attack

The attack on the Indian Parliament was carried out by the Lashkar-e-Taiba (LeT) and Jaish-e-Mohammed (JeM), both Pakistan-based terror groups. A total of 14 people, including five terrorists, were killed in the attack, which led to a border standoff between India and Pakistan that lasted for months. The terrorist, Afzal Guru, who was convicted for his role in the attack, was hanged on 9 February 2013.

2005: Delhi bombings

On 29 October 2005, Pakistan-trained terrorists targeted the national capital two days before Diwali. Bombs were placed in busy markets, with the aim of causing maximum casualties. The death toll in the terror attacks was 62, with more than 200 people injured.

2008: Mumbai terror attacks

Ten Pakistani terrorists came via boat and unleashed mayhem in India’s financial capital in November 2008. The terror attack in Mumbai lasted for four days, killing 165 people and injuring more than 300. The terrorists targeted a suburban railway station, two five-star hotels, a Jewish centre and a well-known eatery among other sites in South Mumbai. Nine of the 10 terrorists were killed, while the lone surviving terrorist, Ajmal Kasab, was tried for his crimes and sentenced to death. Kasab was hanged on 21 November 2012. Pakistan has shielded LeT commander Zakiur Rehman Lakhvi and the terror group's founder Hafiz Muhammad Saeed, the two masterminds of the Mumbai attacks.

2016: Uri attack

In one of the biggest attacks on an Army camp in more than 25 years, a group of fidayeen attackers targeted the 12th Brigade of the Army in the Uri sector of Jammu and Kashmir on 18 September 2016. The attack, which was planned in Pakistan, left 17 soldiers dead and some 30 injured. The four terrorists lobbed grenades and a long gun battle ensued. All four terrorists were killed, but the losses inflicted on the Army were unacceptably high. The Modi government responded by ordering surgical strikes across the LoC. The strikes, carried out on the intervening night of 28-29 September 2016, targeted terror launch pads in Pakistan Occupied Kashmir. Some 35-40 terrorists were killed in the strikes, according to estimates by Indian intelligence agencies.

2019: Pulwama attack

In one of the deadliest attacks targeting paramilitary forces, a car bombing killed 40 CRPF jawans in Kashmir’s Pulwama district on 14 February 2019. The suicide bomber was later identified as Adil Ahmad Dar and the Jaish claimed responsibility for the terror attack. Twelve days later, the Air Force launched airstrikes across the border, demolishing terror camps in Pakistan’s Balakot.
