50,000 Ganesh idols to be immersed in Telangana today

The procession of Khairatabad Ganesh will commence around 6 a.m.

On the final day of Ganesh festival on Thursday, around 50,000 idols are expected to be immersed in various lakes in the State, including 21,000 in Hyderabad limits.

Various wings of the Telangana Police department, including Civil Police, Armed Reserve, Telangana State Special Police (TSSP), will be deployed on bandobust duty. Besides them, Grey Hounds, Organsisation for Counter Terrorist Operations (OCTOPUS), and Rapid Action Force (RAF) would be involved in the duties, said Director General of Police (DGP) M. Mahender Reddy.

Addressing a press conference here on Wednesday, the Director General of Police said more than 35,000 personnel would be deployed in Hyderabad, Rachakonda and Cyberabad Police Commisisonerates.

Police identified sensitive areas on main procession routes where police officials would keep constant watch.

Besides, officials had the information if any locality had witnessed clashes between Ganesh festival organisers in the past 10-15 years. Measures were taken to avoid such incidents.

All spots of idol immersion, main and tributary procession routes would be covered with CCTV cameras.

The DGP said Command and Control Room was set up at Hyderabad Commissionerate to monitor the progress of procession and immersion of idols.

The Director General of Police (DGP) cautioned that action would be taken against those creating rumours which would disturb peace in society.

Security measures

A force of around 21,000 people would be on bandobust duty on the final day of the immersion procession in Hyderabad Police commissionerate limits, 5,600 in Rachakonda and 5,500 in Cyberabad.

Arrangements were made at 50 immersion points in the three commissionerates, including Hussainsagar, Saroornagar, Kapra and Amneepur lakes.

Addressing a press conference here on Wednesday, Hyderabad Police Commissioner Anjani Kumar said Vajra vehicles (anti-riot), with water cannons, were deployed in sensitive areas of the city.

An app was developed to track the movement of 20 important Ganesh idols. “Movement of these vehicles will be tracked every minute using the app,” said the Police Commissioner.

Using DJ system or loud speakers in the procession was not allowed.

“It affects wireless and cell phone communication. We cannot communicate in times of emergency,” said Mr Anjani Kumar.

Over three lakh CCTV cameras in Hyderabad limits would be used for the bandobust.

The immersion procession of Khairatabad Ganesh would commence around 6 a.m. on Thursday, and immersion would be complete by afternoon, said Mr Anjani Kumar.

Around 53 cameras were installed for the Bada Ganesh procession.
