Prove allegations made against Mamata Banerjee or apologise: TMC writes to Amit Shah

Prove allegations made against Mamata Banerjee or apologise: TMC writes to Amit Shah

India

oi-Vikas SV

Kolkata, Jan 29: The Trinamool Congress (TMC) on Tuesday wrote a letter to Amit Shah over the allegations made against West Bengal Chief Minister Mamata Banerjee during the BJP president's rally in East Midnapore. The letter said the BJP president should either prove the allegations levelled or apologise before the public. It also warned that the party may take "appropriate legal" steps against Shah.

"While giving your speech, you had made several wild allegations which have no basis and/or legs to stand. However, this letter relates to the personal remarks and statements made by you against Ms Mamata Banerjee, Hon'ble Chief Minister of West Bengal and the Chairperson of All India India Trinamool Congress," the letter undersigned by Chandrima Bhattacharya, president of West Bengal TMC.

[West Bengal: Vehicles parked near Amit Shah's rally vandalized, BJP warns TMC]

"You had in the open meeting charged Ms Banerjee of earning crores and crores of rupees from her paintings. You had also stated that the money received by her was proceeds of Chit Funds. You had alleged that while renowned painters sell their paintings at some thousands rupees, she sells her paintings in crores," the letter further said.

It says that the payments received for paintings have disclosed to the authorities including the income tax department and the EC.

Here is the letter which TMC wrote to Amit Shah:

WB Trinamool Mahila Congress Pres Chandrima Bhattacharya writes to BJP President Amit Shah over his speech in East Midnapore today. In the letter, Bhattacharya asks him to 'either prove his statements &/or withdraw the same&apologise before public' or legal steps will be taken.' pic.twitter.com/cae0AYmz4R — ANI (@ANI) January 29, 2019

Amit Shah launched a scathing attack on West Bengal Chief Minister Mamata Banerjee at a public rally in East Midnapore. Shah alleged that the Trinamool Congress (TMC) government "has propagated poverty and violence" in the state. Amit Shah also gave a call for "change of government in Bengal" to make the state "Sonar Bangla" (Bengal, a land of gold) once again.

[2019 Lok Sabha polls an opportunity to re-create Sonar Bangla, says Amit Shah]

Bangladeshi infiltrators have become the vote bank of the TMC, he said. Only the Modi government will be able to make Bengal free of infiltrators, Shah added.

For Breaking News and Instant Updates Allow Notifications

Story first published: Tuesday, January 29, 2019, 21:51 [IST]
