Two-day bank strike days before Puja

With September 28 being fourth Saturday and September 29 a Sunday, the two-day strike will affect banking services in the final weekend before the festival.

Last-minute shopping before the Durga Puja could be disrupted as four central unions of bank officers have declared strike on September 26 (Thursday) and 27 (Friday).

The All India Bank Officers’ Confederation, All India Bank Officers’ Association, Indian National Bank Officers’ Congress and the National Organisation of Bank Officers have written to the chairman of Indian Banks Association, the apex body of the banking industry, on Thursday, stating their intent to strike against the government’s decision to merge 10 public sector banks into four banks.

As the list of banks for merger includes two headquartered in Calcutta — Allahabad Bank (to be merged with Indian Bank) and United Bank of India (to be merged with Punjab National Bank, along with Oriental Bank of Commerce), the impact of the strike is expected to be more in the city with officers participating in the protest.

“In the garb of branch rationalisation, branches will be closed. We have seen this when associate banks were merged with State Bank of India. In the name of rationalisation, right-sizing of human resources, voluntary retirement is offered, which is nothing but instigated termination of services and loss of employment. In addition, such a situation creates humungous pressure on the officers and staff as they have to manage the work-load of voluntarily retired personnel. These will have a cascading effect on customer services and deprive the common and needy populace of banking facilities,” said Soumya Datta, general secretary, All India Bank Officers’ Confederation.

He added that with the banks dilly-dallying with the appointment of workmen directors on their boards, the unions are mulling legal option challenging the boards’ decision to approve the merger.

Although bank officials said they would fill up the ATM machines, at some locations they might run out of cash.

Datta also said the bank officers would go on an indefinite strike from the second week of November.

“The workmen unions will sit soon to decide their course of action in view of this development,” said Rajen Nagar, president All India Bank Employees’ Association.
