Dadi’s girl in a new India: Priyanka evokes Indira but the road for her is far tougher than for Mrs G

Sagarika Ghose has been a journalist for over three decades, starting her career with The Times of India, subsequently moving to Outlook magazine and The Indian Express. She has been a primetime news anchor and has also worked as Consulting Editor, The Times Of India. She is also a political commentator on the news channel ET Now. Ghose is the author of the best selling biography of Indira Gandhi, "Indira, India's Most Powerful Prime Minister." She is the author of the recently published theoretical work, “Why I Am A Liberal”. LESS ... MORE

Congress, media and political class are agog at the official entry of Priyanka Gandhi Vadra into politics. She’s being compared to the original ‘Mrs G’, complete with striding walk, no-nonsense short hair, flamboyantly fashionable saris and instant charisma with crowds. Dubbed the ‘real’ heir to Indira, evoking the mystique of the Gandhi family woman in UP, she’s seen to have the same mass connect as Indira.

But beyond outward appearances, the truth is the Congress party today finds itself in a completely different universe than in Indira Gandhi’s time. In fact the differences in their situation are more glaring than any similarities.

In Indira’s time Congress was still Nehru’s party, an opposition-less colossus with a virtual monopoly on power, dominating the states and the natural party of power at the Centre.

Today by sharp contrast, Congress is a shrivelled diminutive version of its 1960s avatar, weak, bereft of mass leaders, disorganised and in power in only five states.

Priyanka has been put in charge of eastern UP, but here in the last assembly elections of 2017, in the core 29 seats of Purvanchal, Congress drew a blank. In the 2017 polls, Congress got a miserable 6% of the vote, before that in the 2014 Lok Sabha polls getting only a 7% vote share across UP and winning only two seats.

Yet eastern UP was once the original fortress of Congress, the region that sent three Indian prime ministers to Delhi, Jawaharlal Nehru, Lal Bahadur Shastri and Indira. Purvanchal-Avadh is not only where the Nehru home, Allahabad, is located but also the region of Jawaharlal’s constituency, Phulpur. The region was once the stamping ground of Congress heavyweights like Kamlapati Tripathi and Uttar Pradesh itself was once the Congress cradle from whose soil sprang party chieftains Govind Ballabh Pant, Hemvati Nandan Bahuguna and VP Singh.

Today Congress cuts a sorry figure in UP. Since 1989, when the party’s long decline in the state began, it’s been unable to grow strong local leaders or to expand beyond the Gandhi family pocket boroughs of Amethi and Rae Bareli. Two generations of Indians have grown to adulthood since Indira Gandhi’s assassination in 1984 and they view Congress less through dewy-eyed nostalgia but simply as a party ruled by a single parivar, a mantra BJP never tires of repeating.

For Indira, being Nehru’s daughter was a huge advantage because of the stature the Nehru family enjoyed in the 1960s. Today by contrast when the rags-to-riches saga is seen as the great India story, the privileged dynast tag could weigh Priyanka down. Indira could play up her image as Nehru ki beti, Priyanka will have to play down her elite family background to strike a popular note.

Priyanka has one advantage that her dadi didn’t: the TV camera. Indira, never a natural orator, toiled long and hard to earn her spurs, going head to head with party stalwarts, keeping up a scorching pace among crowds, resorting to ever expanding populism to build her personality cult. Today in the age of television, even the occasional spirited sound-bite can become masterful oratory when magnified by 24×7 coverage. TV can create political leaders overnight: Arvind Kejriwal used it deftly during the Anna Hazare movement, Prime Minister Modi is a primetime warrior par excellence.

But telegenic netas face a danger: the camera tires very quickly. If there is a wide gap between an overwhelming presence on camera and real performance on the ground, this disparity is cruelly magnified 24×7. The contrast between a barely visible Naveen Patnaik and his long record in office and a highly visible Modi with several disappointments setting in, is an example here. TV may have enhanced Indira’s reach and appeal in her day, but over time would have robbed her of her mystique. All camera-friendly politicians including Priyanka, remain in danger of sinking into this treacherous TV quicksand.

In contrast to Priyanka, Indira had a much harder landing in politics and fought bruising battles with hostile party bosses Kamaraj, Nijalingappa and the ‘Syndicate’, even splitting the party to establish her dominance. Indira’s opposition was within, Priyanka’s – having sailed into a top job without resistance – is outside. Indira did not have to face a dauntingly well-organised party machine like BJP or fight two of the most intensely competitive politicians of the post-Independence era, namely Modi and Amit Shah. Nor did Indira have to contend with entrenched caste based networks of the SP-BSP combine in UP or to resurrect Congress from near-death.

There’s another difference between the two. Indira inherited Rae Bareli not from her father but from her enormously popular husband, the LSE-educated Feroze Gandhi, who won convincingly from there in 1952 and 57. Feroze was a stellar parliamentarian who didn’t baulk at robustly exposing corruption scandals in Nehru’s government. By contrast, Robert Vadra is hardly the asset to Priyanka as Feroze was to Indira and BJP can be expected to target him constantly, making him a liability in her rise.

Politics today is much more cutthroat than it was in the 1960s. Also, the mantle of greatness that sits on the founders of political dynasties, be it Parkash Singh Badal or M Karunanidhi, seldom passes in same measure to successors who remain trapped by the silver spoon image. Sky high expectations often burden dynastic successors, particularly when they fail to match up to the giant stature of the dynasty founder to whom they are invariably compared. Dynasty in politics is almost always subject to diminishing returns. Thus, formidable challenges make Priyanka’s onward journey far tougher than it was for Indira Gandhi.

Facebook Twitter Linkedin Email Disclaimer Views expressed above are the author's own.
