Ajmer dargah diwan snubs Pakistan’s 'Muslims will rise against India' claim, backs abrogation of Article 370

Ajmer dargah diwan, Syed Zainul Abedin | Photo Credit: Times Now

Ajmer: Ajmer dargah diwan, Syed Zainul Abedin has snubbed Pakistan’s propaganda on war threat and its claim that Muslims will rise against India.

He said that if Pakistan attacks India then it will find Muslims of India fighting against it as an Indian. He also went on to justify the abrogation of Article 370 calling it an opportunity for Kashmiris to get into mainstream for progress and prosperity of the country.

The dargah diwan of the shrine further said that Muslims in India are living in far better condition than those living in Islamic countries in the world.

The Imran Khan-government has been targetting India ever since the latter revoked Article 370 of the Constitution that granted special status to Jammu and Kashmir.

Addressing a rally in PoK capital Muzaffarabad, Pakistan Prime Minister Imran Khan said that Muslims across the world will rise against India over the alleged atrocities against the community in Kashmir.

“When atrocities get to their peak, people would prefer that death is better than this insulting life. I want to tell India that by detaining thousands of people, you are pushing people into extremism,” he said in the televised speech.

“People will rise against India, and it is not just about Indian Muslims, there are 1.25 billion Muslims around the world. They all are watching this,” he said.

Khan also hit out at Prime Minister Narendra Modi saying the latter has been a member RSS, which a “Hindu extremist group that hates Muslims, Christians and all minorities”.

Last month, Khan, in a tweet, alleged an impending genocide in Kashmir. He said that “curfew, crackdown and impending genocide of Kashmiris is unfolding according to RSS ideology inspired by the Nazi ideology”.

"Attempt is to change demography of Kashmir through ethnic cleansing. Question is: Will the world watch & appease as they did Hitler at Munich?" he tweeted in August.

Following the Kashmir decision, the Pakistan government reached out to several foreign countries, including the United States against New Delhi’s move. The Imran Khan government also sought the intervention of different countries and international forums in Kashmir issue, however, no country agreed to mediate in the “bilateral matter”.

The Pakistan government has also been warning of nuclear war between the two countries amid the worsening situation.

India has been maintaining that the decision regarding Kashmir was country’s internal matter and Pakistan has no locus standi on it.
