Subasri death: AIADMK man who put up flex board admitted to hospital

Development comes even as the police are contemplating action against him

AIADMK functionary C. Jayagopal, who has been cited as an accused by the city police in the death of 23-year-old R. Subasri, in Pallikaranai, has been reportedly been admitted to a private hospital, even as the police are still contemplating to proceed against him, two days after the death.

On Thursday, Subasri, while returning home from office, was run over by a speeding water tanker in Pallikaranai in Chennai after an illegal flex board erected on a median fell on her. The board was erected by Mr. Jayagopal on the Pallavaram-Thoraipakkam radial road to announce his son’s marriage and welcome party leaders expected to arrive for the event.

While the driver of the water lorry under whose wheels Subasri came under was arrested, no action has been taken on Mr. Jayagopal until now, though he was named in the first FIR.

On Friday, a Division of Bench of Madras High Court also pulled up the city police and Chennai Corporation officials who turned a blind eye to the illegal banners installed on a main road.

The court was informed that two FIRs were registered. The first was against Mr. Jayagopal under the Tamil Nadu Open Places (Prevention of Disfigurement) Act of 1959 on the basis of a complaint lodged by an Assistant Engineer of the Greater Chennai Corporation after the woman’s death. The second was against the tanker lorry driver Manoj Yadav, 25, a Bihari man, under Sections 279 (rash driving), 336 (indulging in an act endangering others’ life) and 304A (causing death by negligence) of the Indian Penal Code on the basis of a complaint lodged by the victim’s father and Mr. Jayagopal would be included as an accused in this too, the court was informed.

Judicial Magistrate- I Alandur refused to remand Mr. Yadav on his production. The reason for declining remand is not clear and the police did not clarify immediately. Sources said the police were in the process of arresting Mr. Jayagopal since morning. Under such circumstances, it came to light that he has been admitted to a private hospital in Pallikaranai.
