Movement against CAB gets a shot in the arm as 10 political parties unite against the bill

* Ten political parties of NE, including BJP allies and JD (U) resolve to fight against the Bill

* If the Bill is passed, it would be very dangerous and harmful for the people of North East, says Mizoram CM Zoramthanga

* The latest development is a natural process, considering protests and sentiments of the people of the North East, says Meghalaya CM Conrad Sangma

STAFF REPORTER

GUWAHATI: The ongoing movement against the Citizenship (Amendment) Bill, 2019 on Tuesday got a shot in the arm when 10 political parties of the North Eastern Region, including BJP allies and JD (U) unanimously resolved to fight against passage of the controversial Bill in the Rajya Sabha.

The resolution was adopted during a convention of NE political parties held here on Tuesday morning. The convention convened by Meghalaya Chief Minister Conrad Sangma was attended by Mizoram Chief Minister Zoramthanga and top leaders of ten regional parties including the AGP.

The convention also resolved to send a high-level delegation comprising leaders of regional political parties to Delhi to meet President Ram Nath Kovind and Prime Minister Narendra Modi to put pressure on them to withdraw the Citizenship Bill.

Addressing a press conference here on Tuesday afternoon, Conrad Sangma said the convention was a natural process, considering protests and sentiment of the people of the North East against the Citizenship (Amendment) Bill and it was not a politically motivated event.

“Leaders of different political parties of NE agreed to turn up at the convention just over telephonic conversations. It was not an organized convention. Since there have been huge protests against the Bill across NE States we have naturally agreed to come united against the proposed legislation,” Sangma said.

Sangma said the convention resolved that it was unfortunate on the part of the Centre for its failure to rise to the occasion of massive protests against the Citizenship Bill. He said a committee would be constituted to reach out to all like-minded political parties across India to join the protests against the Bill.

Asked if the parties will come out of the BJP-led North East Democratic Alliance (NEDA), Sangma said the convention was not a political one but it was for the concerns of the people of the region. “I hope the Centre will also understand the sentiments of the people of the region over the Citizenship (Amendment) Bill, 2016,” Sangma said. He, however, evaded a direct reply to the question of including the Congress in the fight against the Bill.

The Meghalaya Chief Minister added that if the Centre does not pay heed to their demand, the political parties of NE would meet again to decide on a future course of action.

Mizoram Chief Minister Zoramthanga while addressing the media said that if the Bill was passed, it would be “very dangerous and harmful” for the people of North East. “We all need to think together on steps to oppose it,” he said.

AGP president Atul Bora told reporters that the convention was a “historic” one since political parties of the region resolved to fight against the Bill together to prevent its passage in the Rajya Sabha.

The ten NE political parties who participated in the convention were the Mizo National Front (MNF), United Democratic Party (UDP), Asom Gana Parishad (AGP), Naga Peoples’ Front (NPF), National Peoples’ Party (NPP), National Democratic Progressive Party (NDPP), Hill State Peoples Democratic Party (HSPDP), Peoples Democratic Front (PDF), Indigenous People Front of Tripura (IPFT) and the Khnam. The JD (U) was represented at the meeting by its North East in-charge, NSN Lotha.

Also read: All Assam Students’ Union Protests Against Citizenship (Amendment) Bill
