US should help Iraq get back on its feet

I write to you in reference to Jennifer Gnana and Fareed Rahman's article Iraq looking to finance $3bn upgrade of transmission and distribution network (September 10). I deeply sympathise with the people of Iraq.

The country is suffering through no fault of its own, but due to the whims and fancies of former US president George W Bush, a warmonger who falsely accused Iraq’s fallen dictator Saddam Hussein of amassing weapons of mass destruction.

It is America’s duty to help Iraq in rebuilding itself as it is in part responsible for its wanton destruction.

Nazim Hasan Khan, India

President Trump is right to end talks with terrorist Taliban

I write to you in reference to your article Donald Trump vows to hit Taliban 'harder' than ever as US marks 9/11 (September 11). President Trump also warned terrorist militants against ever carrying out an attack in the US again. It's time for the entire world to put an eternal end to terrorists and to their evil state sponsors.

James Sullivan, Abu Dhabi

Other emirates should follow Sharjah's class caps initiative

I write to you in reference to Anam Rizvi and Salam Al Amir's article Sharjah Ruler caps class sizes at private schools to 25 pupils (September 11).

This is great for Sharjah’s teachers and students, though 20 students per class would be ideal. I wonder if other emirates will follow this initiative.

Renee Mabe Small, Abu Dhabi

Bologna is a city with nice people and good food

I write to you in reference to Dan Hancox's article Great Italian food and lack of overtourism: why Bologna is a must-visit (September 11). As an Italian I totally agree!

Bologna is a truly wonderful city with amazing people and fabulous food. A must try.

Elena Frigerio, Abu Dhabi

Thoughts and prayers to those who drowned during Ganesh Chaturthi

I write to you in reference to your article 11 drown as boat with Hindu worshippers capsizes in India (September 13).

Every year devotees partake in the Ganesh Chaturthi celebrations by immersing idols of the Hindu god Ganesh in water.

Despite authorities taking more precautions, innocent people drowned this year as a result of overcrowded boats. I pray for the victims and their families.

K Ragavan, Bengaluru
