Hizbul Mujahideen cautions people about Shah Faesal

Days after he decided to plunge into politics, the 2010 IAS topper Dr Shah Faesal is in the cross-hairs of the terrorists after Hizbul Mujahideen asked people not to get swayed by his alleged 'drama' and stay away from the forthcoming polls.

"India has hatched a plot to make the elections successful. They are using Shah Faesal as fodder to execute their plans. Our appeal to the people is to stay away from polls. If you vote for Shah Faesal, India will claim that entire Kashmir is with them. Please do not get misled by Shah Faesal's claims about 'azadi' and democracy, which is nothing but a drama," read the Hizbul Mujahideen poster circulated on different social media platforms.



On January 23, the 2010 IAS topper, who recently quit services in protest against killings and intolerance, decided to chart "independent political journey" and "stand-up for the poor, marginalized and dispossessed" in Jammu and Kashmir. Faesal also launched the crowdfunding from his supporters for his political sojourn.



"Had he been a well-wisher of Kashmiris, he would have joined any militant outfit like Dr Manan Wani, Dr Sabzar and Dr Rafi (three highly qualified militants who were gunned down by security forces last year) because they knew that the gun is the only solution. We want to tell Shah Faesal that what you can do in our ranks, cannot be done to stay in the company of non-believers," Hizbul said.



Coming from a highly respected and educated family, Faesal suffered a personal tragedy when his father Ghulam Rasool Shah, a revered school teacher, was gunned down by unidentified terrorists in 2002. Faesal, hailing from remote Sogam-Lolaab in border district of Kupwara, later migrated to Srinagar where he passed his MBBS from Sher-e-Kashmir Institute of Medical Sciences Medical College.



Hizbul's statement comes two days after Faesal said military solution will only lead to graveyards. "Attempting military solutions to political problems will lead to nothing but graveyards on this side and graveyards on that side. Today, on the 25th anniversary of Kupwara Massacre, my solidarities are with the people of Kashmir and their sacrifices. Time for resolution is now," he tweeted on January 27.



Efforts to reach Faesal did not yield results as his mobile was either switched off or out of coverage area.
