After repeated nuclear threat, Imran Khan acknowledges Pakistan could lose in war with India

Pakistan PM Imran Khan | Photo Credit: PTI

Key Highlights Pakistan PM, however, said that he was not in favour of war Khan said Kashmir is a potential disaster that will go way beyond the Indian subcontinent Khan had earlier issued the threat of a nuclear war with India over Kashmir

Islamabad: Pakistan Prime Minister Imran Khan, who has been warning India of nuclear war over Kashmir issue of late, has now tacitly acknowledged that Islamabad could lose in a conventional war with India.

The Pakistan PM, however, said that he was not in favour of war and reiterated that his country would never start a nuclear war.

“I am a pacifist, I am anti-war. I believe that wars do not solve problems. War has unintended consequences. Look at the war in Vietnam, Iraq, the wars caused other problems, probably much more serious than what it was originally fought for,” he said.

Khan further said that if Pakistan loses the war with India then it would fight to the death for freedom.

"But I am clear that when two nuclear-armed countries fight a conventional war, there is every possibility of it ending in a nuclear war. If I say Pakistan, God forbid, and in a conventional war, and we are losing, and if a country is stuck between two choices, either you surrender or fight to the death for your freedom. I know Pakistan will fight to the death for freedom, when a nuclear-armed country fights to the death, there are consequences,” he added.

Asserting that Kashmir is a potential disaster that will go way beyond the Indian subcontinent, Khan said that his country has been reaching out to every international forum to resolve the issue.

Further, he criticised India’s decision to revoke special status for Kashmir and that India had "annexed Kashmir illegally" and "unilaterally broken international laws".

Stating that there was "no longer prospect of a dialogue" with India, Khan said that approaching international organisations" and the "stronger countries" like the US, China, and Russia is the only option left with them.

India and Pakistan have been at the loggerheads ever since the former on August 5 revoked Kashmir's special status in order to integrate it into the rest of the country.

The Pakistan PM, in an opinion piece in The New York Times, had earlier issued the threat of a nuclear war with India over Kashmir.

Following the Kashmir decision, the Pakistan government reached out to several foreign countries, including the United States against New Delhi’s move. The Imran Khan government also sought the intervention of different countries and international forums in Kashmir issue, however, no country agreed to mediate in the “bilateral matter”.

In August, during UNSC closed-door session, the US, France and Russia extended their support to India over its decisions on Kashmir, while China supported Pakistan.
