'Kashmir now a flashpoint, has potential of turning into nuclear war'

File photo of Pakistani Prime Minister Imran Khan Reuters

In an interview with Al Jazeera, Imran Khan said Pakistan has limited options to address the situation

Pakistani Prime Minister Imran Khan has urged the international community to play their due role in resolving the Kashmir issue, which now carries the potential of turning into nuclear war.

In an interview with Al Jazeera, Imran Khan said Pakistan has limited options to address the situation, reports the Dawn.

"There is not much we can do except approach all international organizations — mainly the United Nations," he said, adding that the United States, China, Russia, and European countries are all being approached by Pakistan over the matter.

Expressing resentment over the global response after India's revocation of Indian administered Kashmir's autonomous status, he said: ""Unfortunately, because of this whole thing about big markets, [some] countries look at big markets, they look at India as a market of one billion people, but they don't realize that if they do not intervene right now, it will have consequences for not only the subcontinent but the world's trade — everyone will be affected by this."

Possibility of nuclear war

He shared Pakistani Foreign Minister Shah Mahmood Qureshi's concern about an accidental war between the two nuclear-armed states: "What is happening is that India is more or less conducting a genocide. The sort of racial attacks [made] on the population, I don't think it has been witnessed since Nazi Germany. The eight million Muslims of Kashmir are under siege for almost six weeks now. And why this can become a flash point between India and Pakistan is because what India is trying to do is divert attention from its illegal annexation and their impending genocide in Kashmir."

Also Read - Report: India throttling Kashmir media

He continued: ""They are taking attention away by blaming Pakistan for terrorism. And this is what they did last February when there was a suicide attack by a young Kashmiri boy, blowing himself up against an Indian military convoy and India blamed Pakistan for it and then bombed us.

"So we fear that this will happen again because what they are doing in Kashmir will lead to a reaction, some sort of reaction, and they will then blame Pakistan for it to divert the world's attention away from the genocide in Kashmir."

The Pakistani premier warned that if a conventional war were to be fought, "Pakistanis will fight to the death for their freedom."

He said: "When a nuclear armed country fights to the death, it has consequences. That is why we have approached the United Nations and are approaching every international forum urging them to act right now because this is a potential disaster which could go beyond the Indian subcontinent."
