Why Amit Shah thinks Hindi is the language of national integration | India Today Insight

Union home minister Amit Shah's emphasis on making Hindi the national link language has sparked off nationwide acrimony. Speaking on National Hindi Day in New Delhi on September 14, Shah emphasised the need for Hindi to be made the common language of the country. It was necessary, Shah said, to have one language which could represent India in the world. But his contention that Hindi was widely spoken and could be the language to keep India 'united', drew condemnation from across the country.

Opposition parties, particularly from the South, accused Shah of running a divisive agenda and foisting the RSS agenda on the country. Leaders like the DMK's Stalin and the Congress MP, Shashi Tharoor, condemned the move to impose Hindi.

But the Opposition criticism seems to be more a thin attempt to target the BJP in a politically 'dry season'. For two facts are to be considered here--what Shah actually said and the Sangh's long-running stand on Hindi.

Shah has not articulated a stand different from what the Sangh has held for decades. What Shah meant was that while vernacular languages should be given importance in their respective states, Hindi and not English should be strengthened as the link language to protect the core values of Indian culture. Shah said, "To preserve our ancient philosophy, our culture and the memory of our freedom struggle, it is important that we strengthen our local languages and that there is at least one language, Hindi, that the nation knows. If Hindi is taken out of our freedom struggle, the entire soul of the struggle is lost." He tweeted this after the speech to emphasise his point: "I want to appeal to people to promote their native languages but also use Hindi to make the dream of Bapu and Sardar Patel of one language come true."

Stressing that he didn't see the existence of multiple languages as a hurdle to national integration and regretting that Hindi was losing space to English, he said: "Hindi will achieve new heights by 2024 as we take it to all regions of the country. But promoting Hindi doesn't mean this will be done at the cost of some other regional language." Shah's attacks were focussed on the English language, and he commented that many Indians had admitted to him with shame that they had little knowledge of their mother tongue and could speak only in English. He pointed out: "A nation that relinquishes its own native languages can never sustain itself. Indian languages are the richest of all the languages in the world."

It was Shah's emphasis on "taking Hindi to all the regions" that irked the opposition. The Congress said Shah was playing with fire by tinkering with the three-language formula while the Left parties led by the CPI(M) called it an attack on the core principles of India's diversity. The Southern parties, with their history of anti-Hindi agitations, took a stronger stand. DMK chief M.K. Stalin called Shah's views "shocking", and accused him of trying to erase India's pluralistic culture. Even the BJP's ally in Tamil Nadu, the AIADMK, warned that if the Centre imposes Hindi unilaterally, there would be an adverse reaction not just in Tamil Nadu but also in states like Bengal, Karnataka and Andhra Pradesh.

But sources in the BJP say the party has sized up the issue and internal assessments say the massive public opposition to Hindi of the past has petered down and is now limited largely to political parties and leaders. Data from the 2019 survey by the Dakshin Bharat Hindi Prachar Sabha also gives weight to this argument--Tamil Nadu topped the south Indian states for its voluntary Hindi learning classes. Some 500,000 students signed up for its courses, says the Sabha. This might be why leaders like Shah are pushing the issue, to gauge the public reaction to it.

The RSS stand on Hindi as well as on regional languages has been clear from the beginning. The Sangh supports school education of children in their respective vernacular languages and is also not opposed to teaching of English as a separate language. However, it has always demanded that Hindi be the national link language instead of English. It believes only Hindi can be the language of national integration, not a foreign tongue like English.

Shah has explained his views on the subject to India Today in the past too. He has not veered from the Sangh's stand and there is little that he has said different in his Hindi Day speech. Says Arun Kumar, head of the national publicity wing of the RSS, "For the RSS, all vernacular languages are national languages. However, there has to be a link national language. The closest that comes to this is Hindi which is why we want to promote it."

This course of action is also because the BJP-led central government is emboldened by the wave of nationalism triggered by the Balakot strikes and the support it has received countrywide on its decisions on Kashmir, like the abrogation of Article 370 and 35A. The government, perhaps, is of the mind that the time is right to make resolute efforts to make Hindi the language of national integration across India.

Also read | Why Mumbaikars are against their world-class metro

Also Watch | Amit Shah's Hindi push: Will it be one nation, one language next?
