Trump warns Iran of attack saying US is 'locked and loaded'

WASHINGTON: War clouds are building over the Gulf region with US President Donald Trump hinting at military action against Iran after Washington blamed Tehran for unmanned drone strikes over the weekend against Saudi Arabian oil facilities. The attack has shaken the world’s energy supply matrix and sent oil prices soaring.“Saudi Arabia oil supply was attacked. There is a reason to believe that we know the culprit, are locked and loaded depending on verification, but are waiting to hear from the Kingdom as to who they believe was the cause of this attack, and under what terms we would proceed!” Trump tweeted on Monday morning after US officials made the case that the strike on Saudi facilities came from north or northwest, which would put Iran and Iraq in cross hairs, rather than from Yemen where the Iran-backed Houthi militia claimed responsibility.US officials suggested to reporters that the degree of scope, precision and sophistication of the strikes was beyond the ability of Houthi rebels, even as Iran has denied responsibility and made overtures to Britain and other European nations to forestall any US action.“Remember when Iran shot down a drone, saying knowingly that it was in their “airspace” when, in fact, it was nowhere close. They stuck strongly to that story knowing that it was a very big lie. Now they say that they had nothing to do with the attack on Saudi Arabia. We’ll see?” the US President warned.Trump’s threat came despite the US being less dependent on Saudi oil now and actually standing to benefit from the disruption in the Gulf supply.In fact, he chose the moment to highlight that there would be no energy crisis in the world despite the strike on Saudi facilities, in part because the US is the number one energy producer in the world. The US itself had no need for Middle Eastern oil and gas, but it would help its allies, he asserted.“Based on the attack on Saudi Arabia, which may have an impact on oil prices, I have authorized release of oil from the Strategic Petroleum Reserve, if needed, in a to-be-determined amount sufficient to keep the markets well-supplied. I have also informed all appropriate agencies to expedite approvals of the oil pipelines currently in the permitting process in Texas and various other States,” Trump said.“Because we have done so well with Energy over the last few years (thank you, Mr. President!), we are a net Energy Exporter, & now the Number One Energy Producer in the World. We don’t need Middle Eastern Oil & Gas, & in fact have very few tankers there, but will help our Allies!” he bragged, rounding off his boast with “PLENTY OF OIL!” in all-caps.By happenstance, the flare-up in the Gulf and Trump’s energy boost is taking place a week before India’s Prime Minister Narendra Modi is scheduled to address a rally in Houston, America’s energy capital, an event the Trump White House announced on Sunday the US President will join.India is one of the world’s leading oil and gas guzzlers, importing 85 per cent of its needs, and it was buying more and more from Saudi Arabia and the United States following Washington sanctions against Iran, which used to be a major supplier to New Delhi.Modi’s Houston program was decided before tensions (and oil prices) rose in the aftermath of the strike on Saudi facilities, but the US has long sought to crank up oil and gas supplied to India, in part to offset the trade deficit it has with New Delhi, even as it seeks to wean countries away from Iranian energy.India imported more than $4 billion worth of oil and gas from the US last year, but with sanctions on Iran cutting off that pipeline and the disruption in Saudi supplies, the US could become an even greater supplier than the 4-5 per cent of energy India currently sources from it.Houston, where Prime Minister Modi and President Trump will appear jointly at a rally, is considered the energy capital of the world, home to more than 500 oil and gas exploration and production companies along with 4,000-plus businesses that provide various direct services and support to the industry.Some big-ticket trade deals are expected to be announced before and during the “Howdy Modi!” rally, putting India squarely in the US camp in terms of perception despite New Delhi’s efforts to maintain good ties with major energy suppliers.
