Huge Win For People's Unity, Telangana Govt Cancels Uranium Mining In Nallamala Forest

Telangana govt has decided that it won't be carrying out uranium mining in Amrabad Tiger Reserve (ATR). Chief minister K Chandrasekhar Rao said that an appropriate resolution would be passed in the Assembly and Council in this regard.

“We have no intention of allowing uranium mining... We will not allow Nallamala forests (where the tiger reserve is) to be destroyed. It will contaminate the Krishna river from which we get drinking water. It will impact our capital city Hyderabad. So at any cost, we will not allow uranium mining. This is our firm decision. I request the people of the state not to worry about it,” Rao said.

BCCL

The Union ministry of environment and forests had given in-principle permission to the Uranium Mining Corporation to begin mining in the area.

Following this, the Atomic Minerals Directorate For Exploration And Research had reportedly begun digging wells inside the Nallamala Forest in search of uranium.

However, locals and tribals opposed to the move claiming that the exploration may contaminate river Krishna on which Hyderabad depends for drinking water.

BCCL

It is not just the residents that are under threat from mining. Nallamala Forest is part of Amrabad Tiger Reserve, which, is the second-largest tiger reserve in India. According to the Tiger Census conducted last year there were a total of 17 big cats in the reserve.

Earlier, Minister for IT and Industries KT Rama Rao said in the legislative council that the government would not grant permission for uranium mining in forest areas, even if the exploration being carried out by the Atomic Minerals Directorate in ATR yielded positive results.

BCCL

He informed a member that the AMD has so far not taken up any exploration in any forest areas falling in Nalgonda and Nagarkurnool districts.

“The (State) government has taken a clear stand that no mining will be allowed at any cost in forest areas even if uranium deposits are found during exploration,” Rama Rao said.
