Building on the baby steps in Kabul

Building on the baby steps in Kabul India must initiate a direct conversation with the Taliban with some sharply defined conditions

| Published 30.01.19, 09:59 AM

General Bipin Rawat is right this time. That isn’t something I had imagined I would say. The army chief’s decision to honour Major Nitin Gogoi with a commendation days after the soldier had tied a Kashmiri civilian to his jeep as a human shield in 2017 will remain a festering sore in the military’s relations with the Valley for many, many years. Rawat’s not infrequent bombast-laced threats against Pakistan and China may help stir jingoism but don’t serve to stabilize our tense borders. But earlier this month, Rawat suggested that India break with its policy of not engaging with the Taliban in Afghanistan. “If [a] number of other countries are talking to this group, do we have [an] interest in Afghanistan is the first issue,” he asked, in response to a question at a media briefing. “If the answer is yes then you cannot be out of the bandwagon.”

Advertisement

For more than two decades, India has steadfastly held the official position that it will not talk directly with the Taliban — though it has, on occasions, had indirect, secret contacts with the group. That posture is rooted in the conviction that the Taliban remain beholden to Pakistan and must be seen as a proxy for Rawalpindi. Any legitimacy bestowed on the Taliban will strengthen their quest to return to power in Kabul which would be a nightmarish scenario for India, goes the argument. That part of the Afghanistan equation hasn’t changed. What has altered is the direction in which Afghanistan is today headed, and India’s ability to influence how those in power in Kabul behave. The Donald Trump administration has indicated its plans to scale down its military presence in Afghanistan. There was no denial of the December 21 report in The Washington Post suggesting that Trump has ordered the Pentagon to draw up plans to halve the 14,000-strong US military contingent in Afghanistan. From a president who loves nothing more than to accuse The Post and others of ‘fake news’, that silence must be read as confirmation. In December, Trump wrote to Pakistan’s prime minister, Imran Khan, requesting his help in getting the Taliban back to negotiations on a peace deal, further lending weight to the view that a withdrawal might be on the cards. Already, the United States of America is pulling out of Syria.
