Fishing in troubled waters

Jiby writes on politics, developmental issues & legal affairs and enjoys hunting for data to make his arguments. He works on the Edit Page at The Times of India

I am no longer a votary of majority governments in India. The institutions wrecked by majority governments who base their destructive actions on the claim that they have won the popular mandate to govern has turned me off majority governments. Narendra Modi has proved to be no different from Rajiv Gandhi and Indira Gandhi who first demonstrated to us the dangers that autocrats pose to multiculturalism and federalism. Without allies who can serve as a check on executive overreach, each of these rulers threw caution to the winds.

Look no further than Citizenship Bill amendment which is destabilising the North East or the turmoil in the Supreme Court, CBI, RBI, and now even in a small body like the National Statistics Commission performing the small systemic check of independent verification of statistics compiled by various government bodies like NSSO and CSO. Let’s also recall demonetisation for good measure. Modi was merely doing what his political position allowed him.

Before him, Rajiv and Indira Gandhi were no different. Rajiv’s opening of the Babri locks, overturning of the Shah Bano judgment, and getting embroiled in Sri Lanka or Indira’s Emergency, supercession of Supreme Court judges and encouragement of Khalistanis and Tamil Tigers were acts of foolhardiness. Also don’t forget how countless state governments were dismissed through misuse of Article 356 in the Indira-Rajiv era. In contrast, coalition governments face greater checks and balances because they are constantly accountable to their allies.

The demerit of coalitions are known to everybody: that they weaken executive power, which is further exacerbated if a weak PM is at the helm. The rapid rise of China where a Xi Jinping has remarkable leeway in pushing growth, new technologies and social changes is often cited as a reason for why India should also change. But India’s remarkable diversity would certainly militate against a homogeneous model imposed from above.

The BJP with its stranglehold on the North has attempted to spread its idea of nationalism, culture, Hindutva and development but met a massive political setback in three Hindi heartland states itself. A country like India has to be governed with more circumspection. It is not just democracy that keeps the country together but the creation of a large number of independent institutions that help the government run this country smoothly. For example, it is the credibility that RBI has earned which fosters faith among international agencies in India’s ability to repay its debts.

If 2019 delivers a coalition government, it falls on all parties to rebuilt the edifice that has been ruined. Rather than sharing the spoils of power, the onus must be on regaining the institutional balance that has been yet again destabilised by a majority government. We can still live with a strong executive provided there is an equally robust Parliament with bipartisan parliamentary committees that also have a say in policy making as in the US. The parties aspiring for central power in 2019 must deliberate how Parliament and its committees can gain a greater voice in the political life of the nation.

Facebook Twitter Linkedin Email Disclaimer Views expressed above are the author's own.
