On 'highest threat radar', Amit Shah says no to NSG security, to continue with CRPF cover

New Delhi:

Union Home Minister Amit Shah has reportedly said no to the NSG security. Instead, Shah has opted for the CRPF cover, an HT report said on Tuesday. Though no clear reason has been listed for the decision, it should be noted that the CRPF has been protecting Shah’s predecessor Rajanth Singh since 2014. This move makes Shah the first home minister to get the CRPF security, the Hindustan Times report said. Amit Shah is the second person on the high threat list. No.1 being Prime Minister Narendra Modi. At present, around 100 CRPF commandos protect Shah in three shifts, the report added.

The VIP security assessment committee under the Union Home Minister has been reviewing the security provide to top leaders. Previously, former Prime Minister Manmohan Singh’s SPG security cover was withdrawn. The decision was taken by Amit Shah-led Home Ministry after the annual review. This is not the first time that the SPG cover of a former Prime Minister has been withdrawn. Earlier, security cover of HD Deve Gowda and VP Singh was also subsequently withdrawn after such a review by the Home Ministry. Instead of SPG cover, Manmohan Singh will now be given CRPF security. The current security cover review is a periodical and professional exercise based on threat perception that is purely based on professional assessment by security agencies. Dr Manmohan Singh continues to have a Z+ security cover.

Meanwhile, Union Home Minister Amit Shah on Tuesday said the Modi government will not tolerate any breach of India's territory and is ready to deal with any such acts strongly. Shah also asserted that the situation in Jammu and Kashmir has been peaceful ever since the special status given to the state under 370 was abrogated on August 5 and added that not a single bullet has been fired nor anyone has died since then.

"There will be no compromise on India's security. We will not tolerate even an inch of breach of our territory. We will deal with it strongly. We will not allow any drop of blood of our soldiers go in vain," he said addressing an event of the All India Management Association.

For all the Latest India News, Download News Nation Android and iOS Mobile Apps.
