Varanasi: River Ganga Water Rises Above Warning Level; Alert Issued

Varanasi district administration has set up a flood control room after a flood warning has been issued in some parts of Uttar Pradesh. According to the officials, River Ganga has crossed the water warning level mark after an extremely heavy rainfall. Following the warning by the Central Water Commission (CWC), the Varanasi administration has also issued helpline numbers for the flood-hit and affected people. As per the Indian Meteorological Department, 'a heavy to very heavy rainfall' warning has been predicted over the next few days in the State.

IMD warning

According to the Meteorological Department's report on Tuesday, the water levels in the rivers of East Uttar Pradesh and Bihar will be rising from September 17 to September 20 due to the incessant rainfall over Nepal. According to predictions, Nepal will be witnessing heavy rainfall till September 18. As per reports released by the Central Water Commission, the Ganga was flowing at 70.64 metres which is 38 cm above the warning level on Monday. The danger mark is 71.26 metres, it stated.

Rainfall Forecast and Weather Warning dated 17.09.2019: pic.twitter.com/4exJCM4cKm — India Met. Dept. (@Indiametdept) September 17, 2019

Read: Kiren Rijiju flags off 'Great Ganga Run'; Aim is to raise awareness

Read: PM Modi's gifts to be auctioned off for Mission Ganga: Jitendra Singh

Current flood situation in Varanasi

Several parts of Bihar and Patna have been witnessing a flood situation over the past few days. After the water level rose in the River Ganga, the water flooded the Ghats in Varanasi and the low-lying areas along the river. According to reports, people living in the low-lying areas have been evacuated and moved to relief camps. The Varanasi district administration has asked the police and the National Disaster Response Force (NDRF) to stay on a high alert until the situation can be under control. Further reports stated that the NDRF team has rescued several people on Sunday. Reports state that the wooden logs kept for cremations in the lanes of Ganga River were seen floating in the floodwaters.

Read: India uses Drones, AI and Big Data technologies to draw up digital map

Read: Sahibganj witnesses inauguration of a riverine Multi Modal Terminal
