India asks Pakistan to allow use of its airspace for PM Narendra Modi’s flight to New York: Report

File image

New Delhi: India on Wednesday made a formal request to Pakistan to allow the use of its airspace for Prime Minister Narendra Modi’s flight to the United States later this week. PM Modi is due to depart for New York this weekend to attend the annual session of the United Nations General Assembly (UNGA).

News agency ANI reported quoting the Pakistani media that India has made a formal request to Pakistan “to allow the use of its airspace for Prime Minister Narendra Modi's flight to New York, US.”

The report said Pakistan will hold consultations before announcing its decision on the request.

The development comes amidst heightened tensions between India and Pakistan over the Kashmir issue. Earlier this month, Pakistan had refused to allow the use of its airspace for President Ram Nath Kovind’s flight. The President was due to travel to Europe for a three-nation tour.

India has formally requested Pakistan to allow use of its air space for Prime Minister Narendra Modi's flight to New York, US. Pakistan to respond after consultations: Pakistan media — ANI (@ANI) September 18, 2019

While rejecting India's request for allowing the use of its airspace for the India President, Pakistan's Federal Aviation Minister Ghulam Sarwar Khan had said that enough is enough.

Khan had said that Pakistan had earlier allowed the use of its airspace for PM Modi's flight to France last month as a goodwill gesture.

While reacting to the denial of use of airspace for the President's flight, Ministry of External Affairs spokesperson Raveesh Kumar had said: “We regret the decision of the Pakistan government to deny overflight clearance for a VVIP special flight, which is otherwise granted routinely by any normal country. We call on Pakistan to recognise the futility of such unilateral actions.”

It may be noted that Pakistan had shut its airspace following the Balakot airstrikes in February, post the Pulwama terror attack. Indian Air Force planes had on February 26 struck at a terror facility in Pakistan’s Balakot to target the Jaish-e-Mohammed group, which had carried out the February 14 Pulwama terror attack in which over 40 CRPF personnel were killed.
