The face of many a product

Model Hari Nair has done over 500 commercials and has even been featured with film stars

If you are one of those who does not skip ads while watching your videos or a commercials on TV, then you sure would know the face of model Hari Nair.

Though he had a regular job, Hari says he was bitten by the modelling bug when he was a college student. The model, who has worked in over 500 ads — in still photography and TVCs (television commercials), is 46 years old and credits his friends and classmates “for pushing me to field of modelling. I started off right after my graduation.”

He recalls his very first break. “It was a TV commercial for Tata Kappi with Trends films, directed by VK Prakash,” says Hari, who has done commercials with biog names like Priyanka Upendra, Nagma, Vidya balan and Sriya Saran to name a few.

Coke (Coca cola), GRT jewellers, Ashirwaad Atta, Surf Excel, Scotch Brite, Nerolac paints, Sunrich cooking Oil, Cholamandalam MS, Asian paints, Moov, Samsung TV, Gemini Tea, TVS XL super are some of the companies he has modelled for.

“Be it fashion, household items, apparels or electrical and electronic products, I have modelled for them all,” laughs Hari, who has also dabbled in films.

“It has been a nice journey. Those days there was no social media and we had to meet the ad agencies and directors personally. Hence, I had to travel a lot. Lucky for me, I was selected by every team that auditioned me,” beams a happy Hari, who now is looking for openings in films.

Hari is not new to he world of films. He had his first break with the Tamil hit Alaypayuthe, directed by Mani Ratnam. “I play a small character in the film, Swarnamalaya’s fiancé.” Besides that he has also been featured in the music album Ormakayi, which was a huge hit in Kerala. Coming to his association with Kannada film, he has shared the screen with Shiv Rajkumar for Indradhanush, and Mooru Manasu, Nooru Kanasu with Prema.

“I did not pursue it then as my father’s health kept me shuttling between Bengaluru and my home town, Kerala those days. So, I missed out on quite a few opportunities.”

He also adds, “Back then getting into films was really tough. Today the cinema industry is more open to new faces and talents.”
