The NCP's Pawar play | India Today Insight

Of all the blows Sharad Pawar's Nationalist Congress Party (NCP) suffered in recent months, this one was by far the cruelest. On September 14, an influential three-term sitting NCP MP Udayan Raje Bhosale joined the BJP. Bhosale, a Lok Sabha MP from Satara, is the 13th direct descendant of Chhatrapati Shivaji, the founder of the Maratha Empire. BJP President Amit Shah, never one to miss a significant political metaphor, welcomed Bhosale into the party in Delhi the following day. "We are happy that Shivaji's descendant will now be working with us."

Bhosale resigned his Lok Sabha seat taking his erstwhile party's tally to just three MPs, its lowest ever. The leak of leaders from the NCP has now turned into a torrent. In recent weeks, four sitting NCP legislators have joined the BJP-Sandeep Naik, Rana Jagatsinh Patil, Shivendra Bhosale and Vaibhav Pichad. Four former NCP ministers Padamsinh Patil, Madhukar Pichad, Sachin Ahir and Ganesh Naik have quit to join the BJP and Shiv Sena. But the exit of the royal from Satara has caused serious embarassment within the Maratha-dominated NCP.

The state goes to the elections next month with the ruling BJP-Shiv Sena alliance looking well positioned to return to power. The defectors, all of whom have spent five years in the opposition, were of course lured by the promise of tasting power. The brash, brusque Ajit Pawar has not made matters easier.

A common thread has emerged in the exodus. A majority of defectors had a score to settle with Sharad Pawar's nephew and heir apparent, Ajit Pawar. The son of Sharad Pawar's brother Anantrao, Ajit Pawar has represented the Pawar bastion Baramati in the Vidhan Sabha since 1994. He was a cabinet minister in all three Congress-NCP governments between 1999 and 2014. In the last two years of the government, he became a power centre as Deputy Chief Minister. This is believed to be the time when hubris set in. In 2013, he hit the headlines with his crass statement at a public rally asking whether he should urinate in the dams if there is no water. He is also an accused in the multi crore irrigation scam that rocked the state five years ago. The Anti Corruption Bureau has filed a charge sheet against him in this case.

Udayan Raje Bhosale was one of Ajit Pawar's most vocal critics within the party. His departure could grieviously hurt the NCP in its bastion-the Maratha-dominated western Maharashtra with 70 Assembly seats. In 2014, the BJP won 24 seats here to the NCP's 19 seats. This imbalance could further increase. Udayan Raje could help the BJP optimise the sympathy with its provision for 13 per cent reservation for the Maratha community in government jobs.

The NCP, a party that Sharad Pawar formed by breaking away from the Indian National Congress in 1999, began to unravel earlier this year. Some trace it to a curious incident that signalled the rise of Ajit Pawar within the party this April. Pawar, was all set to contest the Madha Lok Sabha seat when, inexplicably, he withdrew his candidature. The veteran leader had made a rule that not more than two people from his clan would contest a Lok Sabha election. The rule was widely taken to mean Pawar and his daughter Supriya Sule would continue to represent the party in Delhi. However, Ajit Pawar's son Parth insisted on contesting the election from Maval constituency (which he eventually lost by 1.5 lakh votes). Pawar had no choice but to back out. This immediately sent out signals within the party. It was Ajit Pawar and not his uncle who was now calling the shots. Ajit Pawar's detractors began exploring other options for their political survival. The first to leave was Vijaysinh Mohite-Patil, a powerful Maratha leader from Solapur district who nursed a grudge against Ajit Pawar. Their rivalry dates back to an incident in 2010. Mohite-Patil had been elected legislative party leader by the NCP MLAs. Ajit Pawar would not hear of it. He forced his uncle Sharad Pawar to anoint him legislative party leader. Mohite-Patil never forgave him. In March this year, the veteran NCP leader quit the party with his son Ranjitsinh. His departure beginning the exodus from the party.

With the NCP recording an underwhelming four Lok Sabha seats in May, the party started unraveling.

Two formers Maharashtra NCP presidents Madhukar Pichad and Bhaskar Jadhav-both loyal Sharad Pawar lieutenants-quit to join BJP and Shiv Sena respectively. Neither got along with Ajit. The rivalry between Ajit and Jadhav led to many jokes in the NCP. Replying to a question on the AAP as a politicial threat in 2015, Jadhav replied, "AAP is no threat. Aamhee AAP che baap aahot." (We are the fathers of AAP). Many in the NCP believed that time that the statement was a veiled attack on Ajit Anantrao Pawar. (AAP).

The real shock to the Pawars,however, came from within the family. On September 1, Rana Jagjitsinh, son of Ajit's brother-in-law Padmasinh Patil joined BJP on September 1. Rana was upset with Ajit as he failed to help him in bailing out from a loan of Rs 229 crore incurred by Terna Cooperative Sugar Mill under his chairmanship.

Ajit Pawar meanwhile has hinted at wanting to deviate from his uncle's secular policies. He wants the party to unfurl two flags at its election rallies-one, the party's tricolour flag and the other, a saffron flag emblazoned with Chhatrapati Shivaji's image. Sharad Pawar, however, has shot down the idea calling it Ajit's personal opinion. "We take decisions as a team," he said. An assertion that might have come too late in the day.

Also Read | Why Amit Shah thinks Hindi is the language of national integration | India Today Insight

Also Watch | All official languages equal: Karnataka CM Yediyurappa on Amit Shah's Hindi push
