Congress leader Jitin Prasad cites 1998 AICC resolution to support PM Modi's population concern

Jitin Prasad defended his stand by citing a 1998 AICC brainstorming session resolution on the population issue. (Photo: Facebook)

Former Union Minister and Congress leader Jitin Prasad on Wednesday said that the country needed population control measures to meet the aspirations of the youth. Jatin Prasad said that it was time there should be a countrywide debate to bring in the two-child norm.

The Congress leader's pitch for population control comes after Prime Minister Narendra Modi raised the concern over population explosion during his Independence day speech in August.

Jitin Prasad defended his stand by citing a 1998 AICC brainstorming session resolution on the population issue.

In a tweet, the former Lok Sabha Member of Parliament from Dhaurahra in Uttar Pradesh raised his concern over the population.

"It’s time to sensitise and make India aware of the need for population control/stabilisation. It has been the part of Congress's Panchmarhi Shivir Sakalp to work towards the goal of the two-child norm," Jitin Prasad said.

It’s time to sensitise and make India aware of the need for Population control/stabilisation. It has been the part of @INCIndia Panchmarhi shivir sakalp to work towards the goal of the two child norm. #nationalinterest Jitin Prasada (@JitinPrasada) September 18, 2019

In another tweet, he said, "To start with, Congress workers should mobilise 10 families to adopt population control measures based on the two-child norm."

To start with Congress workers should mobilise 10 families to adopt population control measures based on the two child norm . #nationalinterest @INCIndia Jitin Prasada (@JitinPrasada) September 18, 2019

While speaking to India Today TV, Jitin Prasad said, "It's wrong to say that population control is PM Modi's idea. Congress discussed it way back in 1998 during Panchmarhi session."

"Why should there be any resistance within the party as it was our idea which our seniors had mooted and documented," Jitin Prasad added. The Congress leader added that the country needed a debate on population explosion.

"It is the need of the hour that we deal with it," Jitin Prasad said, while adding, "The youth today is facing problems, infrastructure of our cities is crumbling under pressure of growing population."

"They want a solution, so its high time the government of the day brings in the required law to check the population explosion," Jitin Prasad said.

It comes at a time when the Congress party is already baffled with its leaders singing the BJP tune on controversial issues like Article 370 abrogation and the NRC in Assam.

During his Independence Day speech, Prime Minister Narendra Modi had said, "Keeping your family small is also a form of patriotism."

PM Modi had warned that population explosion can lead to problems for the country in future, hinting at his government's intentions to deal with the menace.
