Pakistan PM to urge Trump to restart Afghan peace talks

ISLAMABAD — Pakistan Prime Minister Imran Khan said on Wednesday that he would urge US President Donald Trump next week to revive Afghanistan peace talks with the Taliban militant group.



Trump abruptly canceled secret talks with the Taliban at his Camp David retreat that were planned for Sept. 8 and has since said the talks are "dead".



"It will be a big tragedy if these talks don't make headway," Khan said at a ceremony at Pakistan's Torkham border crossing with Afghanistan.



Khan said he would meet Trump in New York on Monday, and would emphasize that there had been "destruction and chaos in Afghanistan for the last 40 years".



"We will put our best (effort) that these talks are resumed again," he said.



Khan said Pakistan had directed Taliban leaders to participate in earlier peace talks and only discovered too late that talks had broken down. He said his next role would have been to convince the Taliban to open talks with the Afghan government.



Khan is scheduled to address the United Nations General Assembly while in New York.



The PM also said there was "no chance of talks" with India about its clampdown on the disputed territory of Kashmir until it lifted a curfew for people there.



He also warned citizens that anyone who goes to fight jihad in Kashmir will hurt the territory's cause.



Indian authorities are waiting for "any excuse" to crack down in the Himalayan region, he warned, promising again to raise the issue at the United Nations General Assembly next week.



"If someone from Pakistan goes to India to fight... he will be the first to do an injustice to Kashmiris, he will be the enemy of Kashmiris," Khan said.



"They need an excuse," he said of Indian troops. "It will provide them an excuse for torture and barbarism."



Khan spoke after Pakistan fired back on Wednesday at Delhi's "jingoistic rhetoric" when India's foreign minister vowed to retake Islamabad's portion Kashmir.



"We strongly condemn and reject" the remarks, Pakistan's foreign ministry said in a statement hours after Subrahmanyam Jaishankar told a press conference Tuesday that Pakistani-controlled Kashmir is "part of India and we expect one day that we will have the... physical jurisdiction over it".



Tensions have spiraled since New Delhi's move on its side of the de facto border -- the Line of Control -- to change the status of the Himalayan territory, with Pakistan repeatedly likening Indian Prime Minister Narendra Modi to Hitler and calling for international intervention.



Khan has held demonstrations across the country to protest the move and will highlight the issue later this month at the UN General Assembly in New York. — AFP
