School Holiday Today: Schools in Mumbai, Delhi and these parts to remain closed today – September 19

School Holiday Today in Delhi, Mumbai, parts of Maharashtra | Photo Credit: Thinkstock

Schools in Mumbai, Thane and Konkan region would remain closed today – September 19, 2019. Minister of School Education, Ashish Shelar has confirmed the same on twitter after forecasts of heavy rainfall. Apart from Mumbai, many schools in New Delhi have also announced a holilday for the day due to transporters’ strike in the capital.

Starting with Maharashtra, the schools and junior colleges in Mumbai, Thane and Konkan regions were ordered shut after IMD predicted heavy rainfall in the area. As for other parts of Maharashtra, the Education Minister asked the district collectors to take cognisance of the local conditions and announce holiday accordingly. Any update on the same would be provided on this page, as and when available.

In a completely unrelated matter, many private schools in Delhi have declared a holiday today after the Transporter’s union, UFTA declared a one day strike. Most of the schools have already sent out notification to respective parents regarding the closure of the school. Even schools that do not rely outsourced transport to ferry their students have taken a cautionary measure and declared a holiday today.

DAV Loni Road though has not announced a holiday, it has asked parents to take an informed choice and shared that they would not be plying their school buses as well. The message sent to parents read, "In view of the call for one-day token strike by transporters on 19.9.2019, all the students availing school transport as well as private vans are hereby informed that buses facility including our own school buses will not ply due to security reasons. Parents are thereby requested to decide accordingly." Related News | Many schools in Delhi to remain closed on Thursday due to transport strike

Please note that there is no official announcement as such for government and central schools in the capital. The parents who have not received a notice from school are advised to check with the school authorities regarding status. Schools like DPS Mathura Road and Chinmaya Vidyalaya who had examinations have declared a holiday and rescheduled the examination.

All in Delhi are informed that UFTA has called for a day long protest. UFTA, the umbrella body representing 41 associations and unions of goods and passenger segments, including trucks, buses, autos, tempos, maxi-cabs and taxis plying in the Delhi-NCR region has called for a strike in protest of the MV Act.
