Amit Shah: Don’t want to impose Hindi but…

The DMK postponed “temporarily” a protest programme scheduled for September 20, citing Shah’s statement that he never pitched for the imposition of Hindi.

Union home minister Amit Shah on Wednesday said he never asked for imposing Hindi over other languages but appealed for a common second language other than the mother tongue.

On Wednesday, Shah said in an interview to ABP News: “I never asked for imposing Hindi over other regional languages and had only appealed for learning Hindi as the second language after one’s mother tongue.” He pointed out that he himself comes from a non-Hindi speaking state, Gujarat, but felt the need for India to have a common second language.

Asked about protests by southern political parties against the “imposition” of Hindi, Shah said they were trying to play politics over the issue. “If some people want to do politics, it’s their choice. My appeal is very clear,” he said.

Shah, however, sought to assert the need for a common language for India, citing the example of New Zealand and Australia. “Are we going to become like New Zealand and Australia, who don’t have a language of their own? When foreigners come here (to India), they ask what is our language.”

He felt that in such matters, the government can’t take a strong stand and impose something, adding that acceptance should come from the people.

The home minister had said on Hindi Diwas last week: “It’s a national responsibility that Hindi expands and prospers. Every language has its own importance. But it is absolutely essential that the entire country has one language that becomes the identity of the nation in the world. If there is any language that can tie the whole country in one thread, it is the most spoken language of Hindi.”

This invited a sharp reaction from the leaders of regional parties in the south, who accused the Centre. Actor-turned-politician Kamal Haasan said the battle for the Tamil language would be “exponentially bigger” than the Jallikattu protest.

On Wednesday, actor Rajinikanth said: “A common language not just for India but any country is good for its unity and progress. Unfortunately, (one cannot) bring a common language in our country. So you cannot impose any language.

“Especially, if you impose Hindi, not just Tamil Nadu, no southern state will accept that. Many states in the northern parts will also not accept that.”

Pan-India NRC

Shah, replying to questions over the National Register of Citizens (NRC) in Assam, said the exercise would be extended to the rest of the country.

“Can an Indian go and live illegally in the US, UK, Russia?” Shah asked. “No, then how can other nationals reside in India without legal documentation? That’s why I believe NRC should be implemented all over the country,” Shah said.

He answered questions on the Ram Janmbhoomi-Babri Masjid case in the court and said the government would accept the verdict. He slammed Congress leader Kapil Sibal for delaying the issue in the court.
