Amit Shah climbs down, MK Stalin calms down in the battle over ‘basha’

Language row: Shah says nothing will be implemented by force

RANCHI: Home minister Amit Shah on Wednesday clarified that he was not for forceful imposition of Hindi across the country but had only advocated its use as a common language.Speaking at a private function in Ranchi, Shah said his comments made on the occasion of Hindi Divas on Saturday were misconstrued and politicised.Stating that he too hailed from a non-Hindi speaking state to make his point, Shah said, “I come from Gujarat, which is a non-Hindi belt and Gujarati is spoken as the mother tongue. I have repeatedly said that mother tongues (matri bhasas) should always be strengthened. With this, I didn’t mean Hindi. It is not our matri bhasha. But I feel there should be a common language in the country.”He further said, “In this context, I have appealed to people that after their mother tongues, if you are learning any other language, you should learn Hindi as the second language. I have only requested. What’s wrong with it? I don’t understand. I never advocated imposing it forcefully. If anyone tries to do politics, it is their choice.”He added, “A child can perform and prosper mentally only when he or she studies in his or her mother tongue. And it doesn’t mean Hindi. But there should be one common language in the country.”Shah went on to say that sooner or later, one will have to build a movement to strengthen local languages. “I think we will have to build a mass movement (andolan) sooner or later to save and strengthen local languages. Otherwise, we will become countries like New Zealand, Australia or (those in) Africa which do not have their own languages. When I ask delegates from there about their languages, they draw a blank. We shouldn’t go that way by strengthening local languages and at the same time learn Hindi too.”Stressing that several states had the three-language formula, Shah said nothing of this sort could be implemented by force. “When it comes to safeguarding national interest, I don’t believe in compromising on use of force. But in situations like these (languages), there has to be a dialogue and consensus, not force,” he said.During the course of the nearly one-hour interaction, Shah also defended the government’s decision on abrogation of Articles 370 and 35A from J&K. On Pakistan’s threat of a war-like situation, he said, “They will always try for it. But so far, the Narendra Modi government has managed to maintain the diplomatic upper hand and the entire world is with India.” He also said the National Register of Citizens (NRC) in Assam will have be to implemented across the country. “I believe it should be implemented across the country. It will happen soon. No other country in the world will allow anyone to go and reside there. So, why should we allow? It’s a simple thing,” he added.
