Delhi Is The Third Highest Consumer Of Weed In The World & It's Time To Regularise It

According to an interesting study, conducted by a data-driven media campaign outlet called ABCD, New Delhi is the third largest consumer of cannabis in the world. Yes, you read that right. The city's annual consumption for the year 2018 stands at 38.26 metric tonnes or 38,260 Kg. How's that for a good reality check?

Turns out, Delhi, a city that's stereotyped for running 'high' on power also seems to be running 'high' on weed. However, even with one of the highest consumption rates of the cannabis plant, legalisation of it in the country is still in a confusing space.

Surprisingly Karachi ranked second among 120 countries, with a total annual consumption of 42 tons and New York topped the chart with a whopping 77.4 tons of annual consumption last year.

The organisation also creates the Cannabis Price Index that reflects the number of growshops across the globe and finds those locations that seek to legalise cannabis. It is the most useful and underused plant amidst us.

According to experts, cannabis has derivative properties that can be used medically to cure an ailment or for other purposes such as horticulture; however, it's commonly used as marijuana, a supposed illegal drug in most parts of the world.

Marijuana is roughly consumed by around 125 million people across the globe in some form or the other.

© Pinterest

In India itself, the drug is commonly and highly used in the form of weed and hashish, and even the remote talks of legalising the drug, due to its heavy consumption in the country, have been dismounted.



Even though the Vedas and the Ayurvedic Samhitas mention the usage of cannabis as a medical and recreational herb, the plant is reduced to its THC element, which induces a psychotropic high; and since people use it as a drug, the government refuses to legalise it, even for medical purposes.



THC, or tetrahydrocannabinol, is the chemical responsible for most of marijuana's psychological effects. It acts much like the cannabinoid chemicals made naturally by the body, according to the National Institute on Drug Abuse (NIDA).



Well, honestly, cannabis is not just a psychotropic substance that gives one the desired high but an amalgamation of various cause and effects that can help make our lifestyle better, if used strategically and wisely.

© Pinterest

But the very fact that a lot of people in India smoke the plant to get high, defeats the ban altogether and that is one major reason why regularising the plant for various purposes truly makes sense.

Apart from legalisation, killing the black market and giving farmers additional option of a crop, is a safer bet to obtain the plant absolutely unadulterated.

© Pinterest

While Delhi is very 'pro-weed', mostly the weed circulated in the city is not of an A-grade quality. The plant is supposed to be taken absolutely unadulterated, however, a lot of unknown components are mixed in it and sold, to make it seem abundant yet not absolutely pure.

This in turn affects the mental and physical health of anyone consuming psychotropic substance that is mixed with unnatural components. Hence proper regularisation of cannabis is important to avoid health hazards because let's face it, the government can ban the consumption of the substance but it's still being consumed in copious amounts across many cities in India.

Here are some more reasons cannabis in any form should be legalised and more importantly regularised in India.While Delhi is very 'pro-weed', mostly the weed circulated in the city is not of an A-grade quality. The plant is supposed to be taken absolutely unadulterated, however, a lot of unknown components are mixed in it and sold, to make it seem abundant yet not absolutely pure.

(1) It Will Stop Illegal Trade

If trade is regularised for cannabis, it will be dealt with by farmers, retailers and merchant clerks and not so much by drug dealers or criminals, as proper rules and regulations will be followed, bringing the crime rate down a plenty.

© Pinterest

(2) You Can't Get Easily Addicted To Cannabis

A study conducted showed that only 9% of people who used cannabis had a higher chance of addiction whereas tobacco, alcohol and cocaine addiction stood at 32, 15 and 16 percent respectively.

© NCBI

(3) Cannabis Has Medical Benefits

Yes, we all know it has medical benefits but it's not put to full use as it should be. The plant treats varying diseases and illnesses both mentally and physiologically. It treats glaucoma, prevents cancer from spreading to various parts of the body through cannabis oil(CBD), reduces anxiety and improves metabolism. It also helps the creative juices from flowing in the brain which can make our work productive. In fact cannabis's other component, CBD doesn't make a person feel intoxicated.

© Pinterest

(4) It Can Provide Job Opportunities

Cannabis cultivation can reap a lot of benefits for the farmers, especially in Himachal Pradesh and Tamil Nadu where the climatic conditions are favourable for its growth. Cannabis plantation is a mainstay for a lot of local farmers in these areas but unfortunately due to the illegalisation, they are forced to sell their produce to drug dealers who don't pay them enough to maintain a stable lifestyle. There is added pressure from the police to burn down the cannabis plantations as well. It can be used for a lot of other purposes and can be cultivated with less THC, to be used in horticulture and other useful practices, making it a lucrative livelihood for the farmers.

© Pinterest

(5) Bad Weed Can Lead To Cannabis- Psychosis

Poor quality weed can affect the brain and lead to a mental psychosis, if it's adulterated. A person can lose touch with reality and have hallucinations, delusions, disordered thoughts, paranoia and unusual responses. The weed available illegally in some places is absolutely impure and smoking it can induce a negative reaction in the brain that could be irrevocable. That's why it's important to regularise the sale of weed, in order to avoid psychological dysfunctionality through it. A proper system to supply cannabis to those who need it should be put in place and those who wish to do it recreationally, should be allotted a particular quantity which is clean and unadulterated.

© Pinterest

The study also concluded that if the drug were legalised and taxed, Delhi could raise $101.2 million (Rs 725 crore at today's exchange rate) if the tax rate of the most widely sold cigarettes brand were applied on this drug. Besides, it reported, If the average US tax rate on marijuana tax were applied, Delhi would raise Rs 225 crore.

In a truer sense, cannabis cultivation can help the country's socio-economic development but because the plant is used mostly as an intoxicant, the government is afraid to see the other positives it has to offer, especially for India's economy.

Regularising it will only help keep a check on the quality of the plant while keeping a strict watch on demographic consumption of weed in a city. It's about time to regularise one of the oldest plants known to mankind.
