Babri Masjid case: JuH warns Sunni Waqf Board against any deal

Lucknow: Accusing chairperson of UP Sunni Central Waqf Board, Zufar Farooqi of engaging in activities that raise “suspicion” about his intent to safeguard interests of Babri Masjid in the Ayodhya title suit in Supreme Court, a faction of the Jamiat Ulama-e-Hind (JuH) on Wednesday warned that any deal against law and justice will not be accepted by the community.

However, Farooqi dismissed the allegations and said the JuH faction has nothing to do with the case.

Talking to reporters in Lucknow, Maulana Muhammad Matinul Haq Osama Qasmi, state chief of the Mehmood Madani fraction of JuH, warned Farooqi, saying “And if he continues this way, the JuH will hit the streets.” Times of India reported.

TOI quoted him as saying, “Sunni Waqf Board chairman recently wrote to Justice Khalifulla’s mediation panel to resume talks between both parties. We are not against mediation, but when the court is more than halfway through the hearing, the move appears suspicious.”

Maulana Osama said that he has learnt that Farooqi recently sacked lawyers closely attached with the case to include new ones at the last minute. ‘The fresh set of lawyers, I am told, have been in favour of unilateral surrender’ he said.

While saying that the decision of the Supreme Court will be acceptable to the community, Maulana Osama warned that the suspicious activities of community’s representatives will not be tolerated.

Meanwhile, Zufar Farooqi said, “The faction of the Jamiat making these baseless accusations is not connected to the Babri Masjid case. The real president of Jamiat in Uttar Pradesh is Maulana Ashhad Rashidi, who is a party in the case. And he’s pursuing the case in apex court.”

Office secretary of Arshad Madani-led JuH in UP, Ghufran Qasmi also supported Zufar Farooqi’s statement saying “It is the Arshad Madani faction which is fighting the title suit and is represented by Maulana Rashidi. We have no connection with the press conference held in Lucknow.”
