After losing her husband to cancer, THIS woman is supporting cancer survivors!

Cancer--the word in itself has the capacity to scare the daylights out of anyone. Cancer not only causes tremendous pain to the patient, it slowly wreaks the life of the caregiver as well. After all, what is worse than seeing someone you love lose the battle to the death, bit by bit.Cancer that affects both colon and rectum is known as colorectal cancer. Symptoms of this deadly disease include a change in bowel habits and rectal bleeding or blood in the stool. However, often there are no symptoms at all.The story of Dimple Parmar and Nitesh Prajapat is heartwarming and incredibly brave at the same time. It talks about hope and fighting against all odds, together. Dimple became friends with Nitesh Prajapat when both of them were studying MBA in the second year of IIM Calcutta.Soon enough their friendship blossomed love and they decided to get engaged. However, soon enough Dimple got the shock of her life when she got to know that Nitesh was diagnosed with Stage 3 colorectal cancer.Talking to a media outlet, Dimple recalls those early days of trauma, “It was hard to accept that a young man who is very active, seemingly healthy, will have to fight against cancer.""I began to develop a kind of empathy for him. He was a smart, intelligent, ambitious young man. He was a very good human being. I wanted to fight his battle with him…”After the diagnosis in the year 2016, both Dimple and Nitesh spent a lot of time figuring out ways to battle this formidable disease. Amongst routine checkups, continuous treatment and cycles of chemotherapy, the duo got engaged on the day of their graduation in 2017, on the campus. However, things took a turn for worse in the next few months when a report revealed that the disease had spread to his lungs, pelvis, and other abdominal areas. Not the ones to bow down in the face of adversity, Dimple and Nitesh got married after he was diagnosed with a Stage IV cancer.Talking about the tormenting journey, “I took a break from work to look after him. People would keep telling me that there was no hope, but I wasn't ready to give up. That is when I began researching clinical trials in the U.S. and other countries. I wanted to do everything possible to heal him, and I believe love and faith play a big role in curing a loved one.”Dimple chose to stay by her husband’s side with full faith, taking ‘until death do us part’ vow to the next level. When Nitesh breathed his last in the year March 2018, she realised that she needed to give back the love, strength and unconditional support back to the society. This gave birth to Love Heals Cancer, which was Nitesh’s dream.Overwhelmed with the love and strength she received from the people during her testing times, Dimple decided to provide support, information and other holistic services to help those battling cancer.As of now, Love Heals Cancer provides an array of cancer-related services and have a team of 50 healthcare experts. Their primary aim is to help cancer patients and their caregivers to find extensive healing options and improve their quality of life. Dimple’s core belief is that in addition to regular treatment, extending warmth, love and support to cancer patients can play a huge role in healing them. More power to you, Dimple!
