In fresh threat letter, Jaish-e-Mohammad warns of bombing railways stations and temples in Punjab in October

A letter, purportedly by Jaish-e-Mohammed, threatened to blow up railways stations and temples in Punjab (Representative image) | Photo Credit: ANI

Firozpur: Days after threatening to blow up to Rewari railway junction in Haryana by October 8, another purported letter by terror outfit Jaish-e-Mohammed (JeM) has warned of bombing several railway stations in Punjab on the same date.

The Firozpur Divisional Railway Manager (DRM) has reportedly received a threatening letter by the area commander of JeM group, in which the terror outfit has supposedly claimed that they would blow up railway stations in various areas including Firozpur cantonment, Bathinda, Amritsar, Patiala, Jalandhar, Phagwara and Firozpur on October 8. reports said.

The letter also claimed that it would bomb several religious places in the state on October 28.

As per the threatening letter, the JeM planned to target Damdama Sahib in Bathinda, Devi Talab temple in Jalandhar, Kali Mata temple in Patiala and the Golden Temple in Amritsar.

Notably, just days ago, security agencies had received a similar letter - purportedly by Pakistan-based JeM - in which it claimed that the terror outfit would blow up railway stations and temples in six states.

The letter had claimed that JeM terrorists would target at least 11 railway stations and six temples across six states during the festival of Dussehra in October.

The threat letter listed railway stations in Rohtak, Rewari, Hisar, Kurukshetra, Mumbai City, Bengaluru, Chennai, Jaipur, Bhopal, Kota and Itarsi as well as temples in Gujarat, Tamil Nadu, Madhya Pradesh, Uttar Pradesh, Haryana and Rajasthan as the potential targets of the terror group.

In Haryana, the Rohtak Junction Station Superintendent office received a letter that claimed to target the Rewari railway station by October 8.

The letter was supposedly sent by one Masood Ahmad from Karachi in Pakistan. Following the receipt of the threat letter, security was tightened in and around the Rewari railway station and other important installations.

In April this year as well, Jaish-e-Mohammad had sent a threat letter, claiming that it would blow up five railway station of Firozpur Division to take revenge against the killing of terrorists belonging to the terror outfit.


