BJP state president forms digital army to withstand spam

Around 8,000 volunteers are already scrutinising social media and countering messages with facts



As Bharatiya Janata Party (BJP) commenced its statewide campaign for the upcoming Assembly polls — gathering a battalion of workers for a maximum reach — it ironically forgot to man its social media fortress, which is now inundated with spams and online trolls. This phenomenon caught the notice BJP’s state president, Chandrakant Patil, who has now vowed to fight this online menace through Dada’s Digital Sena. This campaign, launched under ‘Karyakarta Kartadharta’ programme, is already controlling the data circulated on social media, countering false claims and doctored videos.



Launched on September 14, this digital battalion has a war room of its own where a dedicated team of volunteers is scrutinising the social media under Patil’s leadership. This team is expected to monitor the content related to the party and its ministers. BJP leaders claim that the response has been good so far with 8,000 volunteer enrolments already in place.



“The young generation is attracted towards BJP due to the leadership displayed by Prime Minister Narendra Modi and home minister Amit Shah. The party is trying to impart a sense of direction to the youth and this initiative is another medium to bolster this growth,” Patil said.



Yogesh Jadhav, the coordinator of Patil’s digital army, informed that a core team of 15 people is stationed in Mumbai, whereas 17 others are distributed across the state. “They are tasked with verifying the messages and then further circulating it to the WhatsApp group formed with the volunteers. Then the admins have to ensure that further communication is not tampered with,” he said.



The team is further divided into groups of 250 volunteers for every constituency. They have to ensure that no unverified content is circulated. A plan of action to combat spam, where the incoming messages are shared on a separate group with the core team, is also in place. If the message is found to be fake or spam, then a counter-message is prepared and circulated to stall the claims.



“Messages not just in WhatsApp groups but also comments on Facebook and Twitter are being scanned. If we find anything objectionable, then we are immediately countering it with comments and facts,” Jadhav added.


