'They May Stoop Low, India Will Soar High': Syed Akbaruddin On Pakistan Raising Kashmir At UNGA

New Delhi:

India has said that it will not stoop low to Pakistan's level when asked about the response if Pakistan raised the Kashmir issue at United Nations General Assembly (UNGA). Syed Akbaruddin, India's Permanent Representative to UN, was asked about the chances of Kashmir issue to be raised at the UNGA and how India would tackle it. He replied that it was for every country to determine its trajectory and how it wants to approach global platforms.

Without taking directly naming of Pakistan or Imran Khan, Akbaruddin said that there might be some who stoop low. India's response to them would be to soar high.

"They may stoop low, we soar high. What they want to do is their call. We’ve seen them mainstream terrorism in the past. And what you’re now telling me is they may want to mainstream hate speech," said Akbaruddin.

Akbaruddin warned Pakistan that 'poison pens don’t work for too long'. "We are confident that we will soar. We have given you examples of how we will not stoop. We will soar when they stoop low," he repeated.

Prime Minister Narendra Modi will address the UN General Assembly (UNGA) session on September 27. Pakistan Prime Minister Imran Khan is also scheduled to address the assembly on the same day. According to an updated list of speakers released by the UN, Khan will address the session shortly after PM Modi's speech.

Imran Khan had said that he will present the Kashmir issue forcefully at the UNGA. However, PM Modi is more likely to focus on global issue during his speech.

According to reports, the speech may not even have any mention of Kashmir. PM Modi is expected to talk about global issues such as sustainable living, climate crisis and universal health coverage. This would go with India’s standard policy that Kashmir is an internal issue. With this tack, PM Modi will not only snub Pakistan but also pre-empt Islamabad’s plan to internationalise Kashmir issue.

The tension between India and Pakistan escalated after New Delhi revoked Jammu and Kashmir's special status on August 5.

Asserting that abrogation of Article 370 was its internal matter, India has strongly criticized Pakistan for making "irresponsible statements" and provocative anti-India rhetoric over issues internal to it.

For all the Latest India News, Download News Nation Android and iOS Mobile Apps.
