India summons Pak Envoy in connection with a telephone call between Pak FM and Mirwaiz of Hurriyat

Our Correspondent / New Delhi

New Delhi today summoned Pakistan High Commissioner in connection with telephone conversation initiated by Pak Foreign Minister with Mirwaiz Umar Farooq from All Parties Hurriyat Conference.

Pakistan High Commissioner was cautioned that persistence of such behaviour by Pakistan will have implications.

“Government’s position that the entire State of Jammu and Kashmir has been, is and shall remain the integral part of #India, and that Pakistan has no locus standi in any matters related to the State of Jammu and Kashmir, has been made clear again to High Commissioner of Pakistan”, MEA said ina statement.

India’s Foreign Secretary conveyed the Government of India’s condemnation in the strongest terms of this latest brazen attempt by Pakistan to subvert India’s unity and to violate our sovereignty and territorial integrity, by none other than the Pakistan Foreign Minister.

The Foreign Secretary conveyed that this deplorable act has violated all norms for the conduct of international relations even by Pakistan’s own standards. The Pakistan Foreign Minister’s actions are tantamount to direct interference in the internal affairs of its neighbour. Foreign Secretary underscored that by this action Pakistan has confirmed yet again that it officially abets and encourages individuals associated with terrorism and anti-India activities. It has exposed to the entire international community Pakistan’s duplicity in professing their desire for normal relations with India on the one hand, while openly inciting anti-India activities on the other.

The Pakistan High Commissioner was categorically informed by the Foreign Secretary that the Government of India expects Pakistan to desist forthwith from such actions. He was cautioned that persistence of such behaviour by Pakistan will have implications.

Government’s position that the entire State of Jammu and Kashmir has been, is and shall remain an integral part of India, and that Pakistan has no locus standi in any matters related to the State of Jammu and Kashmir, has been made clear again to the High Commissioner of Pakistan.
