Trump’s weekend Houston visit marks 11 trips to Texas since 2017

When President Donald Trump returns to Houston on Sunday, it will mark his fifth visit to city and 11th to the state since he took office in 2017.

He’s been to Houston more than he has been to 34 other states. And his 11 stops in Texas make the Lone Star State one of his 10 most frequently visited places since he was elected.

The President is scheduled to be in Houston on Sunday with India Prime Minister Narendra Modi at NRG Stadium.

Trump has been to Houston twice in the last year. Trump was in Houston in April when he attended a private fundraiser and delivered a speech focused on the oil and gas industry. And 11 months ago he was at the Toyota Center holding a rally in support of U.S. Sen. Ted Cruz’s re-election.

Texas Take: Get political headlines from across the state sent directly to your inbox

Trump has already visited Texas as many times as former President Barack Obama did in two full two terms. In his first four years as president, Obama visited Texas four times. He only visited Houston once during his eight years in office.

Many of his visits have been prompted by tragedy. Twice Trump visited Texas after Hurricane Harvey hit the state in 2017. And in August of this year, he was in El Paso after a mass shooter killed 22 people.

More Information President Donald Trump's visits to Texas since 2017 Aug. 29, 2017, Corpus Christi - Days after Hurricane Harvey, Trump meets with disaster response officials and surveys damage from the air. Sept. 2, 2017, Houston - Trump tours Houston in the aftermath of Harvey. Oct. 25, 2017, Dallas - Trump receives a hurricane recovery update at Dallas Love Field, then attends a fundraiser. May 4, 2018, Dallas - Trump attends the NRA's annual meetings and convention in Dallas. May 31, 2018, Houston and Dallas - Trump attends fundraising luncheon in Houston for the National Republican Senatorial Committee, then travels to Dallas for another fundraiser for national Republicans. Oct. 22, 2018 Houston - Trump holds a rally at the Toyota Center to support U.S. Sen. Ted Cruz's re-election. Jan. 10, 2019 McAllen - Trump visits the border. Feb. 11, 2019 El Paso - Trump holds a rally just miles from the Texas-Mexico border. April 10, 2019 San Antonio, Houston - Trump attends a pair of fundraisers. Aug. 7, 2019 El Paso - After a gunman killed 22 people at an El Paso shopping center, Trump visits hospital staff and victims. Sept. 22 Houston - Trump will speak at NRG Stadium with India Prime Minister Narendra Modi. See More Collapse

Texas has also been a draw for Trump because it’s so critical to his campaign promises related to border security. Trump has visited, El Paso, San Antonio and McAllen in the past year to promote his call for a border wall.

For subscribers: Former GOP leader warns that Texas is now a swing state

Trump’s constant trips to Texas also come as some Republicans warn the state will be far more of a battleground in 2020 than in years past.
