Maharashtra cautions U.P. on labour

The Maharashtra government has urged its counterpart in Uttar Pradesh to keep a check on influx of labour with criminal background into the State.

Maharashtra has about 4-5 lakh mathadi (head loaders) organised under 34 welfare boards, which have lately pointed to workers from U.P. with a criminal background, senior officials said.

Workers from Bihar and U.P. had come under attack in Mumbai following clashes between workers of Maharashtra Navnirman Sena and Samajwadi Party at Dadar in 2008.

The issue of labourers with a criminal background has become the subject of a debate in Maharashtra. Industries, Energy and Labour department. Separately, the workers’ unions too have been conducting drives to check criminal background of the workers.

A recent letter sent by the State labour department to the Superintendent of Police, Jaunpur district, U.P., has mentioned four workers against who Mathadi Board of Maharashtra has pointed to registered criminal cases in U.P.. The department has urged U.P. Government and Jaunpur SP to conduct an enquiry and take action. “A complaint was brought to our notice that four Mathadi workers on Mathadi Board of Maharashtra have registered criminal cases against them. We have requested action against them and asked the U.P. police to investigate,” said Shrikant Pulkundwar, Deputy Secretary, Government of Maharashtra. A factual report has been asked to be submitted to the Government of Maharashtra as early as possible, officials said. “A general advisory has also been sent to them,” said an official of the state Government.

The migrant workers usually work as labour, loading unloading stacking, carrying, weighing goods in hundreds of vegetable and agricultural committees across the State. The work and workers are governed by the Maharashtra Mathadi Hamal and other Manual Workers (Regulation of Employment and Welfare) Act, 1969. Apart from monthly wages from the board along with social security like PF, gratuity, medical benefits, bonus, and leave wages, the workers in Mumbai, Thane, Raigad, and Pune are allowed houses under a special housing scheme.

Mathadi leader and leader of the Nationalist Congress Party (NCP) Shashikant Shinde said a drive is being undertaken to check the criminal background of the workers in general and is not region-specific so far. “Earlier, there was case of a migrant worker who had a criminal background and it was brought to our notice. A general drive is conducted by Mathadi unions to check workers’ background,” said Mr. Shinde.
