New York hits the road for climate change

“

NEW YORK:The true administration of justice is the firmest pillar of good government,” reads the inscription at the entrance to the New York Supreme Court, in front of which a six-year-old girl is holding a hand-painted signboard reading: ‘Delayed justice is injustice. The climate is changing, when will we?’She is not the only one who has stepped out of the four-walled classroom and is out on streets raising an outcry for something her forerunners didn’t. ‘We’ll go to school when the climate is cool’, reads a huge cardboard held by a group of middle school students from a local school.There was no waiting till noon for over 50,000 school students who congregated at Foley Square , all geared up to follow their new superhero Greta Thunberg , the 16-year-old young activist from Sweden who has got the world talking on global warming and climate change. Starting from the square, the world’s biggest march against climate change soon took big steps towards Battery Park.“It's such a victory,” Thunberg said in an interview to an agency on Friday. “I would never have predicted or believed that this was going to happen, and so fast and only in 15 months.”'On Thunberg’s agenda is the UN Youth Climate Summit on Saturday and to speak at the UN Climate Action Summit with global leaders on Monday.“The global leaders have this opportunity to do something, and they should take that. And otherwise, they should feel ashamed,” she added.The protests started across all the five boroughs of New York – right in the subways, classy Manhattan lanes and coffee shops. With the local administration permitting around 1.1 million public school students to be “excused” from school to partake in the protest, the young yet aggressive faces spread out all across the ground zero.Among the uncountable agitators were climate activists from India who took big steps towards the global war. “As India undergoes it's current transformational development, it’s important that every effort in economic and industrial development is built on a foundation of sustainable development . We cannot continue building mines, developing coastal areas and setting up more industries without considering the adverse impact on environment,” 25-year-old Anurag Saha Roy, a quantum engineer from Singapore who got a green ticket to participate in the Youth Climate Summit, told TOI.According to Harjeet Singh, Action Aid ’s global lead on Climate Change and another Indian participant, governments are approaching this emergency at a snail’s pace. “While every scientist in the world is warning that we are on track to a 3 degree C warmer world that will be catastrophic for people and the planet. Rich countries that have fuelled the climate crisis are failing to commit to their ‘fair share’ of climate action and honour their climate finance obligations to developing countries. They must take the lead and urgently scale up their mitigation actions if we are to have a chance of limiting global warming to 1.5°C and preventing runaway climate change,” he said.On children and youth leading the protest march across the world on Friday, Harjeet said, “Women and young people are at the frontline of the climate crisis. Their working conditions are made harder while their rights are threatened as a result of global warming. Young people are demanding climate solutions that empower them, create sustainable employment and safeguard their income.”The march has set the ground well for the big day. The summit will be an opportunity for youngsters all over the world to come together and talk about combating climate change.The UN has chosen 100 young climate champions and has awarded them green tickets to attend the first ever UN Youth Climate Summit. PR Vishnu, a young climate activist from Kerala, is the only Indian with a green ticket from UN.
