10 retired cops booked for drinking in Rajkot

In a case of the law-enforcers breaking the law, 30 police officers were arrested for consuming liquor at a water park in Rajkot on Thursday. In their defence, the cops had hung up their uniforms after retirement.



In a late-night raid on Krishna Water Park Resort, the police apprehended their former brothers in uniform in an inebriated condition. Reportedly, they had all gathered to celebrate the birthday of a retired police officer from the Special Operations Group (SOG), assistant sub-inspector Rajbha Vaghela.



The water park is said to be owned by senior Bharatiya Janata Party (BJP) leader Hari Patel. Of the 30 rounded up, 10 were retired army personnel and seven former police officers, including a deputy superintendent of police.



Many tried to flee as soon as they got wind of the raid, but their panic was caught by the resort's CCTV cameras. The police seized empty bottles and glasses of beer and hard alcohol from the park.



Speculation is rife that high-rank serving officers such as Police Inspectors and Deputy Superintendent of Police were also at the scene but allowed to getaway.



"We received a tip-of about a liquor party held at Krishna Water Park," Rajkot Police Commissioner Sandeep Singh said, "We cordoned off the premises and held 30 former police officers for questioning and took their blood samples. A total of 10 retired policemen tested positive for alcohol consumption," added Singh. An FIR was registered against them.



Sources say civilians were also invited to the party and one of them shot a video of the rambunctious celebrations and sent it to the police, urging them to put a stop to it. Afraid that the video might go viral, the police rushed to the water park and raided the premises to put a stop to the celebrations.

Party Pooper Sources say a party reveller shot a video of the inebriated former policemen and sent it to the local police station.

Afraid that it would go viral, the police rushed to raid the water park that had about 30 retired cops taking part in the celebrations

—Zee Media Newsroom
