Delhi universities set to miss deadline on 10% quota

NEW DELHI: The central universities in Delhi will not be able to meet the January 31 deadline for providing details on the seat matrix and financial requirements for implementation of the 10% economically weaker sections (EWS) quota. Most colleges are also unsure of implementing the 25% increase in intake capacity for all programmes at one go.Delhi University had written to all colleges to provide the details, but they have just submitted what resources they require leaving the financial aspects for later.The principal of Aryabhatta College, Manoj Sinha, said that for most courses the classes will be divided into two sections. “If the implementation of EWS quota requires a 25% increase in intake capacity, a 40% hike in resources — classrooms, teaching and non-teaching staff — will be needed,” he added.“As of now we admit 50 students. With 10% reservation, the number of students will rise to 60 for which we will have to divide the class into two sections of 30 students each. For this, we will require teachers as we cannot disturb the teacher-student ratio. These are the details that we have sent to the university,” Sinha said.As the University Grants Commission (UGC) letter mentions that intake capacity can be increased over two years, colleges are deliberating on phase-wise implementation. “For adding more seats, we may have to make two sections for the same subject. This will lead to infrastructure requirements, like additional classrooms and teachers to maintain the student-teacher ratio,” said the principal of Ramjas College, Manoj Khanna.Khanna added that the planning will take some time and implementation can be done from the next session.Anju Srivastava, principal of Hindu College, stated that colleges will face a space crunch for adding new classes and creating new sections. “We will have to see how to go about the procedure if seats are to be increased to implement this quota,” she added.Other universities are also taking their time to assess their infrastructure and seat structure. A senior official of Jamia Millia Islamia said, “We will discuss the issue in our academic council meeting scheduled on February 4. We will decide how as a minority institution we can formulate implementation of the quota.”JNU Rector-1 Chintamani Mahapatra said, “We are ready to implement the reservation. We will decide on the seat changes and infrastructure requirements soon.”
