Karnataka Congress faces the heat in the absence of Shivakumar

The byelections to 15 Assembly constituencies in the State will be an acid test for Karnataka Congress, which is going to fight elections without its key poll strategist — former Minister D.K. Shivakumar, who is an accused in a money laundering case and has been sent to Tihar jail in the national capital.

In the absence of the six-time legislator, it is up to former Chief Minister Siddaramaiah, former Deputy Chief Minister G. Parameshwara, and Karnataka Pradesh Congress Committee president Dinesh Gundu Rao to prove their mettle in the elections, which are likely to be a three-way contest in all 15 constituencies.

The party is expected to feel the absence of Mr. Shivakumar, who played a major role in ensuring the victory of many of its candidates in a few elections in the past. The Congress launched its campaign on Saturday by holding a ‘Swabhimana’ (self-respect) rally in Hoskote, whose MLA has been disqualified. The party is expected to firm up its poll strategy during its general body meeting on September 26.

As the pitch of campaigning will grow in the midst of Dasara festivities, the polls will be a matter of prestige for the top leaders. Moreover, the outcome of these elections will be significant for Congress to prove its credibility as the main opposition in the State following its dismal showing in the 2019 general elections.

Party’s strategy

The Congress, which has already held a few rounds of meetings with constituency-level leaders to identify winnable candidates, will look to galvanise its cadre by exposing the “misdeeds” of the two-month-old BJP government, its mishandling of the flood situation in various districts, and the alleged reduction of funds for welfare schemes launched by the Siddaramaiah government.

It will be unlike the 2019 general elections, where Congress and JD(S) workers fought together, despite bitterness among grassroot-level workers. As both parties have decided to go it independently, the Congress will make all-out efforts to retain all 11 of the 15 seats going to the polls.

The Congress’ main opposition, the ruling BJP, which appeared to have made inroads into the Vokkaliga heartland in the general elections, is expected to face severe heat in six constituencies around Bengaluru, K.R. Pet and Hunsur. The dislodging of the Kumaraswamy government and the arrest of Mr. Shivakumar have not gone down well with the dominant Vokkaligas, which was evident during a recent rally in the city after the former Minister was arrested.
