Protests in Balochistan against India’s Kashmir move

A file photo of a protest in solidarity with the Kashmiris. (PHOTO: AFP)

QUETTA: Various protests and demonstrations were staged across Balochistan on Friday in solidarity with the people of Indian Occupied Kashmir (IOK) who have been facing a continuous lockdown and curfew since August 4, a day before India illegally stripped the disputed valley of its special status.



The Pakistan Tehreek-e-Insaf (PTI) Balochistan staged a protest in Quetta to show solidarity with the people of Kashmir. The PTI provincial leadership and workers attended the demo in a large number.



"We will fight for the freedom of Kashmiris till the last drop of blood," the PTI Balochistan Secretary-General Bari Barech said while addressing the protesters.



He said the peaceful demonstration is a clear message for the entire world that Indian brutality in Kashmir and its suppression of innocent people will never be tolerated. “This protest is a symbol of Pakistan's unity for the Kashmir cause,” he said.



The PTI Secretary Information Asif Tareen said the time is not far off when Kashmir will be part of Pakistan. Other speakers urged the International community to intervene and take action against Indian brutality which, they said, is creating instability in the region.



They said Imran Khan has bravely fought the case of Kashmir at the International forums and made a strong statement that suppression on Kashmir will not be tolerated.



Balochistan Minister for WASA and Public Health Noor Muhammad Dummar also led a similar rally in Duki and said the Pakistan Army is capable of giving a befitting response to timid Indian Army.



“People of Duki and Ziarat have expressed their full solidarity with people of Kashmir. The people of Balochistan stand shoulder to shoulder with the army. The Pakistani nation won’t tolerate the Modi government’s brutalities over Kashmiri brothers and sisters.”



He said the Pakistani nation has been defending Kashmir case globally. The international community should take notice of Indian brutalities in occupied Kashmir valley as India is a threat to regional peace,” said the minister.



Separately, working women and students also took out a rally in Quetta to express their solidarity with the people of Kashmir. The Kashmir Solidarity rally was arranged by Balochistan Women Development Department.



Published in The Express Tribune, September 21st, 2019.
