Raj Thackeray agrees to contest polls ‘to stay relevant’

Raj Thackeray

state assembly elections

Lok Sabha elections

Congress and NCP

Modi and Amit Shah

Advisors warn Thackeray of mass exodus if the party remains on the sidelines this time.Ditching his tirade against electronic voting machines (EVM), a reluctanthas finally agreed to contest the. Thackeray’s Maharashtra Navnirman Sena (MNS) is set to contest at least 125 seats across the state, and almost all seats in Mumbai, Thane and Nashik. Thackeray will launch the party’s campaign with a series of rallies on the lines of those he held before the. But this time, his target will be Chief Minister Devendra Fadnavis.A senior MNS functionary said that Thackeray had asked for a list of probable candidates from across regions and a final list would be drawn up by next week. “We are preparing the list of candidates. There are a lot of aspirants and we have some winning candidates too, provided that they fight with a strategy. Not just in Mumbai, Nashik and Thane, there is demand for MNS tickets even in the rural hinterland,” said an MNS functionary, who did not wish to be named.The functionary said that the party would fight as many seats as the Congress and NCP. “Theare fighting in 125 seats each. So we will also fight in 125 seats. The BJP is going to be our main target and we will do a repeat of the ‘lav re toh video’ rallies, in which Rajsaheb will expose the bogus claims of the government,” the functionary said.The decision to contest the polls was taken after MNS leaders and poll aspirants convinced Thackeray that the party must be part of the electoral process if it is to retain its cadre and keep their morale high. An MNS functionary said, “Rajsaheb had made up his mind not to fight the elections. Senior leaders of the party who had fought and lost elections in the past had convinced him to stay out of the polls. But we told him that this would lead to a mass exodus from the party. We managed to convince him that the party must fight elections to stay relevant.”The functionary added that some MNS leaders who were not interested in contesting the polls had misled Thackeray into thinking that the party could lose its symbol if it failed to get acertain percentage of votes, and that this was a major reason why Thackeray initially not keen on fielding candidates. The MNS was also keen on boycotting EVMs, but the Congress and NCP rejected the plan.Before the LS elections, Thackeray had held 11 rallies across the state, including three in Mumbai, and targeted. But the MNS factor didn’t click at all, with the Congress-NCP failing to win even a single seat in Mumbai.
