TS Christian JAC protests, burns effigy of nominated MLA Elvis

Hyderabad: The various leaders of Christian Community in Telangana State under the umbrella of Telangana Christian JAC protested against fallacious remarks made by Mr. Elvis Stephenson, Nominated MLA in State Legislative Assembly hurting the religious sentiments of the Christian Community.

The leaders in about 100 number gathered inside the St. Mary’s Church in Secunderabad and shouted slogans, protested and burnt effigy of the MLA Mr. Elvis Stephenson.

The Telangana Christian JAC was originally planned to take out rally as a protest from St. Mary’s Church to Keys High School. But, the idea was dropped as the Police didn’t grant them permission to do so. Then they decided to do a protest inside the St. Mary’s Church premises and they also burnt his effigy.

The JAC to give memorandums to Chief Minister, Assembly Speaker and Minister for Minorities on Monday against the MLA

The Telangana Christian JAC demanded to sack the MLA as he is not their representative and urged the Chief Minister and Assembly speaker to expunge his speech from the records of the Assembly The JAC also decided to give memorandums to Chief Minister, Assembly Speaker and Minister for Minorities on Monday against the MLA. They are even planning to lodge a criminal complaint against the Mr. Elvis Stephenson at Saifabad Police Station for his derogatory remarks against the Christian Religion, Christian Religious Leadership.

Mr. Gopu Bala Reddy, President of Catholic Reddy Association; Mr. Arogya Reddy, Mr. Shashidhar Reddy, Youth Director, Mr. Roydin Roach, Telangana State President, All India Catholic Union; Mr. Larry Hatch, President of Anglo Indian Association; Ms. Ingrid Payal Khurana, an Anglo Indian; Ms. Sandra from Catholic Community; Mr. LM Reddy from Catholic Christian Community and several others, numbering about 100 gathered, made slogans against the MLA, spoke against his remarks and later joined in burning his effigy.

Mr. Elvis Stephenson, Nominated MLA Made fallacious statements in Telangana State Legislative Assembly recently on Christian Community, degrading and attacking all Churches and Christian Faith, informed Gopu Bala Reddy. He just represents 25 Anglo Indian Families in the city. He is not our representative, nor elected by us. He has to be sacked. He must tender the Christian Community an unconditional apology, he said.

Speaking further he added that instead of helping Christian Community by getting Government help, he is damaging the religion and our religious sentiments. He is the most inefficient MLA, he spoke.

Mr. Elvis Stephenson is an Anglo-Indian representing a small community of 1000 people or so made false allegations on the Christian Community. The Constitution of India has given the right to practice and preach Christian faith.

But, Mr. Elvis Stephenson urged the Telangana Government to take action on independent Pastors who are preaching Bible. The entire Christian Community in the state raises objection to this and condemns it said Arogya Reddy.

Mr. Larry Hatch said Mr. Elvis shouldn’t play politics. A wrong candidate is nominated for the MLA post. Mr. Ingrid Payal Khurana said, Mr. Elvis is dividing the community and giving other religions a chance to find a fault with our religion. Instead of talking about women, child problems, he is damaging his own community, she stated.

Mr. Roydin Roach appealed to Chief Minister K. Chandrashekhar Rao and Mr. KT Rama Rao to sack the MLA for hurting the religious sentiments of the community. Catholic School are private.

Even then they have given fee concessions to poor Christian students to the extent of Rs 1.5crore he said. Ms. Sandra observed that these are our internal matters. The MLA should have raised them with concerned Christian Leadership instead of going in public domain through Assembly.

In the memorandum to be submitted the Chief Minister, the JAC mentioned that he, the MLA made lot of other false allegations about the Christian Community. Mr. Stephenson said that the Catholic Educational Institutions were not giving seats and concession to the poor Christians. This is absolutely false, the community observes.











We and all our Christian Institutions are for poor Christians first and then only for others, they maintained. We are giving concessions to all eligible Christians. We strictly follow all the rules and regulations of the Government. Hence we are condemning his statement, they mentioned in the Memorandum to be submitted to the Chief Minister.

Further, the MLA spoken about the Catholic Church hierarchy from the Pope upto Rev. Fathers. He has no right to question the hierarchy of Catholic Church. Pope, Bishops and Fathers are not only religious leaders but also social leaders of the Catholic Community. This system is accepted by all countries globally including India. Hence his statement is condemned, the Telangana Christian JAC added in the memorandum.

The JAC stated that Stephenson is said to be representing Minority Community of Christians. He is not a Christina Representative. He has neither got elected by Christians nor appointed by Church Authorities. Hence, he has no right to say that he represents Christians. On the whole, his speech in the Assembly affected the religious sentiments and faith of all Christians.

It has to be condemned. The community wants Chandrashekar Rao to take strict action against him. They are also requesting him and the Speaker to expunge the adverse remarks the nominated MLA made against Christianity and Churches. His remarks must be taken away from the Assembly records, they demanded.
