Kashmir: Pakistanis in Nigeria demand UN intervention

Adelani Adepegba, Abuja

The Pakistani Community in Nigeria has called for United Nations’ intervention in the alleged crackdown on Kashmiri people and leaders by Indian security forces.

The Pakistanis at a forum in Abuja on Saturday, said the Indian security forces were carrying out enforced disappearances of the Kashmiris, including rape of women and killing of men and children in the territory.

Pakistan and India have been locked in a battle over the ownership of the territory for decades.

Speaking at the event, the Pakistani High Commissioner to Nigeria, Maj. Gen Waqar Kingravi (retd.) accused the Indian government of violating UN Article 370 and 35-A by denying the people in the disputed Kashmir territory of their liberty and other human rights, access to medicines and food.

Kingravi asked the UN and the international community to prevail on India to withdraw its security forces from Srinagar and other Kashmir towns, adding that it should also conduct a plebiscite in the territory.

The envoy also demanded the immediate lifting of curfew and communication blackout in the territory.

He stated, “Pakistan urges the international community to take cogent and meaningful steps to stop India from irresponsible and unilateral actions taken by it; urge India to reverse these steps and work to strengthen peace and stability in the region.”

Director, Social, Economic and Cultural Rights, National Human Rights Commission, Umar Saliu, urged Pakistan and India to seek a solution to their dispute over Kashmir, noting that the people should not be used as fodder.

Amnesty International also condemned the situation in Kashmir, noting that the rights of the people allegedly abrogated by India should be fully restored.



All rights reserved. This material, and other digital content on this website, may not be reproduced, published, broadcast, rewritten or redistributed in whole or in part without prior express written permission from PUNCH.

Copyright PUNCH.

All rights reserved. This material, and other digital content on this website, may not be reproduced, published, broadcast, rewritten or redistributed in whole or in part without prior express written permission from PUNCH.

Contact: [email protected]
