Senior citizen who performed black magic in court held

After lawyers caught him red-handed, they handed him over to Shivajinagar police, who counsel him and let him go; advocates demand stricter action



Lawyers at Pune family court on Saturday nabbed a 64-year-old man who was sprinkling mustard on the staircase of the court in an attempt to cast a magic spell to influence the decision of a judge who was hearing a case that involved the man's daughter. The man was later handed over to Shivajinagar police. Just last week the lawyers attached to the court had spotted a lemon sliced in halves and marked with red pigment lying on the court premises.



The senior citizen, a retired officer, admitted the offence during interrogation. However, on request of his family members, no formal first information report (FIR) was registered against him. Police, instead, conducted a counseling session to ensure that he does not resort to such an act of superstition in the future.



During interrogation, the elderly man informed that he performed 'black magic' to obtain favourable order from the particular court. After the counselling session and written assurance from the man, police allowed the offender to go without any FIR.



Meanwhile, the Pune Family Court Lawyers' Association has demanded strict action against the offender under the Maharashtra Prevention and Eradication of Human Sacrifice and other Inhuman, Evil and Aghori Practices and Black Magic Act, 2013. The association claims that this will set an example before other such offender who might commit similar crimes.



According to Shivajinagar police, the offender was caught red-handed while he was sprinkling yellow mustard on the staircase. The man even admitted to have kept the sliced lemon on the court staircase in the past.



During interrogation, he informed that a marital dispute is going on between his daughter and son-in-law. He claimed that his daughter stays in the US and works in a private firm. The son-in-law, who is employed in Pune, wanted his wife to resign from her job in the US and come back to India with their 10-year-old daughter. The daughter, however, is not willing to come back immediately, he said. The man further claimed that the son-in-law has filed for a divorce due to the alleged discord between the couple. He further stated that he wanted the judgment to be in favour of his daughter, adding that he chose to take resort of the superstitious ritual as he had read in a magazine that such acts do obtain desired results. He, accordingly, wanted the judge to pass an order in his daughter's favour.



Talking about the whole incident, KS Jambhale, inspector attached to Shivajinagar police station, said, "We have interrogated the offender. Following the inquiry, we conducted a counselling session where he narrated his ordeal. Seeing no past criminal records or activities, we decided not to register the offense."



Talking to Pune Mirror , Vaishali Chandane, president of the lawyers' association, said, "We wanted the culprit to be punished since despite being highly educated, he engaged in such superstitious practices. An FIR under the Black Magic Act, 2013, would have set an example and deterred similar offenders who might engage in such practices and malign the hallowed court premises."


