‘Howdy, Modi!’: Trump in audience, PM Modi stings Pak on terror at Houston event – Voice Of Vienna

Prime Minister Narendra Modi on Sunday called for launching a “decisive battle” against those who support and nurture terrorism saying their identity is known to the whole world and added that the US president, Donald Trump, who had sat in the audience to listen to the India leader after his own speech, is firmly committed to facing this challenge.

The prime minister then called for a standing ovation from the audience for the American leader. Without naming any country the prime minister slammed “some people” who are opposing what India has done in Kashmir by abrogating Article 370, and said they are those who “cannot run their own.” “They have hatred towards India as the focus of their policy” and support and nurture terrorism” and have been behind the 9/11 attacks in the United States of 26/11 in Mumbai.

The Prime Minister added that US President was standing firmly in this fight.

“And I want to stress, President Donald is standing firmly in this fight against terrorism” Modi said calling for a standing ovation for him from the audience.

President Trump had vowed in his own speech to fight again “radical Islamic terrorism”, which had drawn a loud and long applause from the stands and a standing ovation from the Prime Minister Modi and delegation sitting in front of the stage, including Foreign Minister S Jaishankar.

For most parts, the two leaders demonstrated much bonhomie and camaraderie at the unprecedented joint appearance in Houston. They hugged, clasped hands, clapped each other on the back and had only the most eloquent praise for each other, the ties between the two nations, their governments and, they stressed, and between them personally, and spoke of the “historic” importance of their joint appearance on the stage.

On display was the growing closeness between the two leaders, the easy camaraderie they have come to develop and share over their frequent meetings and interaction bilaterally and at multilateral meetings. They meet again, for example, on Tuesday in New York on the sidelines of the UN General Assembly debates.

“You have never had a better friend as President than President Donald Trump, said Trump as he sometimes does referring to himself in the third person. And the “the prime minister knows that,” he added.

It was Prime Minister, in fact, who brought up that before, when introducing the American president.

He has reminded the president of a slogan he had used as a candidate for the White House in 2016 — ‘abki bar Trump sarkar”, which was a version of Modi’s own campaign slogan “abki bar Modi Sarkar.”

Before their on-stage hug, they exchanged tweets as President Trump, who was running late, sought to keep the crowd warmed up through a series of tweets about Modi and India. “Will be in Houston to be with my friend. Will be a great day in Texas!,” he wrote, triggering the exchange.

Modi tweeted back: “It surely will be a great day! Looking forward to meeting you very soon”

And Trump replied: “Look forward to being with our great India loving community!”

And before setting out, he spoke to reporters about “a stadium loaded up with, I guess 70,000 people … I was asked by Prime minister Modi… it’s a very big deal for India …Tremendous respect for Modi”.

And then they on the stage, following the appearance of lawmakers from both parties, governors and city officials, including Texas senior senator John Cornyn, who is also the co-chair of the Senate India caucus, House Majority leader Steny Hoyer, Indian American Raja Krishnamurthy and Representative Pete Olsen, the only one to show up in an Indian dress.

Indian Americans came from all around the country. Dharmendra Kumar got in late Saturday from Pennsylvania. Was it Trump or Modi? “Modi,” he said. Kumar had registered for the event long before the announcement about President Trump’s participation.

He is an independent but said Trump will have have his vote for 2020 if announced the reform of the country’s Green Card programme to remove the country limit because of which waiting time for applicants from India is over 100 years at the current rate of disposal of cases.

“If he fixes it, he will have my vote,” said Kumar.

Trump didn’t and he will never know how disappointed he may have left the audience. Many Indian Americans had expected to hear the president reassure them he had their back on this.

But other Indian Americans were looking beyond. “This is historic,” said M Ramaswami, founder of Indiaspora, an Indian American advocacy group. “Trump’s presence here mainstreams the Indian community, sends all sorts of signals in all directions. “Indian Americans matter, for their money and their votes,” he added.

“Before this, I was interviewed mostly by Indian news outfits and channels but since the Trump announcement, I have been on BBC, the New York Times the other day, and you name it.”

Ravi Kathuria, a Houstonian of 30 years and a writer of business and spiritual books said the event reflected the Indian American community flexing its muscle.__Hindustan Times
