Terror, borders, chemistry dominate Modi, Trump speeches at Howdy, Modi

Terrorism, secure borders of the United States and the friendship between Prime Minister Narendra Modi and United States President Donald Trump were the main topics that dominated both the leaders' speeches at the mega 'Howdy, Modi' event in Houston, Texas.

PM Narendra Modi on Sunday addressed Indian-Americans at the 'Howdy, Modi' event in Houston along with Donald Trump. It was for the first time that Trump and Modi shared a stage together and addressed a record crowd of 50,000 Indian-Americans.

While addressing the event, PM Narendra Modi heaped praises on the Unites States president and said that his presence on the stage with him was a testimony of the close and strong partnership the two nations share.

"I admire him [Donald Trump] for something more, his sense of leadership, a passion for America, a concern for every American, a belief in the American future, and a strong resolve to make America great again. He has already made the American economy strong again. He has achieved much for the US and for the world," PM Modi said.

Giving tacit support to Donald Trump for his re-election bid in the US 2020 Presidential election, PM Modi said, "Abki Baar, Trump Sarkar".

WHAT DONALD TRUMP SAID AT 'HOWDY, MODI' EVENT

While addressing the Indian diaspora, Donald Trump spoke of shared values among the world's two largest democracies and praised the Indian-American community for revolutionising the world of technology.

"Indian-Americans are helping revolutionize technology to change the world and improving lives," Donald Trump said, adding that both the countries will work together to create cutting-edge technology to benefit millions.

Donald Trump also made a reference to jointly fight the "radical Islamic terrorism" which was received by the Indian American community with a standing ovation at the packed 'Howdy, Modi!' event in Houston, Texas.

In his speech, Donald Trump said that border security is vital to the United States as well as India and "India and America will together fight radical Islamic terrorism".

The NRG Stadium in Houston was packed with 50,000 people making 'Howdy, Modi' the biggest rally by a foreign leader in the US. (Reuters photo)

Backing India's bid to protect its borders, the United States president said, "Both India and the United States understand that to keep our communities safe, we must protect our borders."

Without mincing his words, Donald Trump outlined that both nations are committed to "protecting innocent civilians from radical Islamic terrorism". He received a standing ovation from the crowd, which also included PM Narendra Modi.

Donald Trump said, "In November, the US in India will demonstrate tremendous progress of our defence relationship, holding the first-ever tri-service military exercise between the two nations. We are committed to protecting the Indian-Americans from the threat of radical Islamic terrorism."

Apart from these, investment and defence featured prominently in Donald Trump's speech at the mega event.

WHAT NARENDRA MODI SAID AT 'HOWDY, MODI' EVENT

PM Modi addressed the Indian community in Houston after Donald Trump ended his speech. During his speech, PM Modi invited Donald Trump to visit India with his family. He also thanked Donald Trump for attending the event and Houston for welcoming him.

"We want you [Donald Trump] to come to India with your family, and give us the privilege of welcoming you. Our friendship and the Indian-American shared a dream...we will give it a new future," PM Modi said at the 'Howdy, Modi' event.

PM Modi also mentioned his government's decision to scrap the provisions under Article 370 that gave a special status to the state of Jammu and Kashmir (J&K).

With Donald Trump listening keenly, PM Narendra Modi made a veiled attack on Pakistan Prime Minister Imran Khan, saying the Indian government's decision on Article 370 only bothered those "who cannot even take care of their own country".

He said that India had bid "goodbye" to Article 370 that went against people-centric development in J&K. "Some people have a problem with the abrogation of Article 370, these are the same people who cannot govern their own country," PM Modi said.

Without naming Pakistan or Imran Khan, PM Modi said, "They are those who shield and nurture terrorism," adding, "The whole world knows them very well. Their identity is in the sponsorship of terror and the world knows it."

The prime minister also said that the J&K people were deprived of the rights that have been granted to the rest of the country. "Terror and separatist elements were misusing the situation and Article 370 and India purged it. Now, the people in J&K have got equal rights," PM Modi said.

"For 70 years, it was proving a big challenge that India has given a farewell to. It kept people away from the benefits of development and equality. The Constitution that is for the rest of India is now also for J&K and Ladakh. All the discrimination that women, children and Dalits faced has ended."

After the speech, both the leaders clasped their hands and walked together, waving to the cheering crowd.
