Standing up for heritage

heritage structures

Karnataka

Mysuru heritage

Srikantadatta Narasimharaja Wadiyar

Citizens protest plan to demolishin MysuruA coalition of concerned citizen experts that campaigns for the preservation of heritage building, ‘#HeritageBeku - #PastForward’ has written to the Chief Secretary, Government of, against the proposed demolition ofsites Lansdowne & Devaraja Markets. They argue that the grounds of ‘safety’ under which the demolitions are to be undertaken, are “flimsy”.Lansdowne Building was constructed in 1892 in the heart of the city, in honour of Lord Lansdowne, 5th Marquiss of Great Britain, when he visited Mysore as the Governor-General of India that year. The structure, a tourist spot, abuts Mysuru Palace and Devaraja Market, a 130-year-old building. The structure of the North Gate of Devaraja Market was demolished in August 2016, after which a stay order was issued by the High Court in 2017, based on an RTI filed by S Mahadev, President, Tenants Association of Devaraja Market, which conclusively proved that it was a as protected heritage building.The renewed push for demolition has left them “deeply distressed”, as Priya Chetty-Rajagopal, co-founder, Heritage Beku and concerned citizen, says. “It’s like taking away KR Market,” she says. “This, when the HH(HHSNW) Foundation has said they are willing to chip in with funds. There has been no public consultation, and instead of speaking of restoration, they have gone straight to demolition. The arguments are so flimsy, as in the case of the Janatha Bazaar. We’re embattled and tired. How do we reconstruct spirit?”The letter requests the government to pay heed to the citizen group and give them a clear response, a hearing, an outline of why this is being done and what alternatives are being proposed to address the conservation of this ‘beloved central part of Myrusu’. Chetty-Rajagopal adds: “It’s saddening that decisions are taken arbitrarily, without any respect for sentiment. We need to realise that heritage is an issue of spirit. We need to remember that places matter.”
