Ice-cream studio under fire for ‘manhandling’ customer

Ludhiana: The incident of manhandling a customer Prabhjot Singh by a bouncer of a city-based ice-cream studio has become the talk of the town.The management of the outlet is under fire from city residents and social media is abuzz with thousands of comments from people seeking action against the owners and the bouncer.Besides this, a lot of people have called for a boycott of the ice-cream studio claiming that such kind of incidents have been happening here and owners should be taught a lesson.The level of resentment of people against the outlet can be gauged from lakhs of views and thousands of comments on the videos showing arrest of the bouncer from the shop.Ludhiana residents are also urging each other for not visiting such eating joints and places that employ bouncers.People are also blaming the police, administration and politicians for inaction in the case.Commenting on one of the videos, Manu Shahii, said: “It has been almost 12 hours since the incident at the ice-cream studio, but none has come forward for the family.”Another comment by Narinder Singh Masson reads: “Hiring of goons is reflective of the criminal mindset of the owners and that too with illegal and lethal weapons. Policemen in both the videos are only mere spectators. These PCR cops usually are beneficiaries of doles, food and money and they do nothing for the safety of the public.”Singla D C, another person who commented on the video, said: “It is a family place, then why did the owners hire bouncers. Strict action should be taken against them and it should be assured that there won’t be any such thing in the future.”Another social media user Advocate Harjot Singh says: “Boycott is the best punishment for the ice-cream studio. Else, they will easily manage the legal hiccups.”Meanwhile, the management of the outlet is claiming that the allegations of beating the customer are not true and the customer created a ruckus inside their shop.According to Sanjeev Verma, manager of the shop, said: “Prabhjot Singh or any other customer was not even touched by the boucers or any of our staff. The entire incident is being wrongly projected on the social media. There was a tiff between two families. Prabhjot Singh, member of one of the families, was seen hurling abuses at the other family. Our staff only asked him to leave the outlet and no one manhandled him.”—————————————————-Competitors take advantageIn a twist to the entire incident of manhandling a customer by an ice-cream studio and backlash on social media, the competitors of the outlet have taken to social media to promote their business by trying to win over the customers.Owner of an ice-cream parlour at Model Town, while promoting his ice-cream studio at Model Town, posted a message on social media stating: “Please visit your own ice-cream parlour in Model Town. We don’t have any bouncers and we treat our customers like our family members. We are located at an excellent location.”
