Bank strike in September 2019: Banks closed on 2 days this week

Bank strike September 2019 | Photo Credit: BCCL

Key Highlights All the public sector banks may remain closed for two days including Thursday, September 26, and Friday, September 27, 2019 Earlier last month, Finance Minister Nirmala Sitharaman announced a giant merger plan of public sector banks

New Delhi: Bank employees’ unions are set to observe a country-wide bank strike on two days in the present week of September 2019. Following the bank strike in India in the last week of September, the public sector banks will be closed for four days in continuation in this week. If happens, this could be the second nation-wide bank strike by the PSU bank unions in the current calendar year.

The two-day bank strike by the PSU bank employees’ union has been called in order to protest against the public sector bank mergers announced by the government. Earlier last month, Finance Minister Nirmala Sitharaman announced a giant merger plan of public sector banks under which 10 weak PSU banks will be amalgamated into 4 larger entities.

Bank strike in September 2019: Bank holidays in September

According to media reports, as much as four lakh bank employees of public sector banks are likely to participate in the bank strike to oppose the merger plan of the government. With the collective pressure from the various employee unions and banking lobbies, all the public sector banks may remain closed for two days including Thursday, September 26, and Friday, September 27, 2019.

The operations of almost all the public sector banks are likely to be affected on these two days. “From September 26 to 27, four organisations representing four lakh officers throughout the country will go on strike. We are opposing the merger of public sector banks as it is against the general public,” news agency ANI reported citing R Sekaran, Secretary of the All India Bank Officers' Confederation's (AIBOC) state unit.

State Bank of India (SBI), the country’s largest bank, has said that the bank has made “all arrangements to ensure normal functioning in its branches” but has indicated a possibility of disruption of work “to some extent by the strike”.

According to a PTI report, All India Bank Officers' Confederation (AIBOC), All India Bank Officers' Association (AIBOA), Indian National Bank Officers' Congress (INBOC), National Organisation of Bank Officers (NOBO) have jointly served the bank strike notice.
