All set for Interim Budget tomorrow

vermaajay1968@gmail.com

Aditi Tandon

Tribune News Service

New Delhi, January 30

The government will present the Interim Budget on February 1. This will be the last Budget of the BJP-led NDA government ahead of the General Election. The session will start tomorrow with an address by President Ram Nath Kovind to both Houses of Parliament and conclude on February 13. There will be no Economic Survey.

The session is expected to be stormy with the government planning some big-ticket announcements in the Interim Budget to be presented by interim Finance Minister Piyush Goyal besides pushing the controversial Citizenship Amendment Bill in the Rajya Sabha after it was passed by the Lok Sabha in the last session.

The Finance Ministry today clarified that the forthcoming Budget would be called Interim Budget 2019-2020 and not General Budget.

Even the provisional business list of the Lok Sabha terms it as “Interim Budget 2019-2020”, which is in line with tradition whereby the outgoing government takes the nod of Parliament to spend for four months through a Vote on Account until a new government assumes office.

The nature of the forthcoming Budget came up for discussion at the meeting Lok Sabha Speaker Sumitra Mahajan called today with political party leaders to discuss the agenda on the eve of the Budget Session.

Congress leader Mallikarjun Kharge said he flagged the issue with his party earlier warning the government against presenting a General Budget. Other Opposition parties also joined the Congress in this demand with the sense being that the BJP could use its last Budget to pledge what it cannot constitutionally pledge.

The Congress had threatened to oppose a full Budget in the Lok Sabha saying the government had no electoral or constitutional mandate to present six full Budgets.

The NDA government assumed office in May 2014 and presented a Budget for financial year 2014-15 followed by Budgets for financial years 2015-16, 2016-17, 2017-18 and 2018-19. It can’t present a sixth full Budget because financial year 2019-20 would commence on April 1, 2019, and continue till March 31, 2020, whereas the tenure of the government would end on May 26, 2019

Session begins today

Interim Finance Minister Piyush Goyal will present the Interim Budget on Friday, seeking Parliament nod to spend for four months

The Budget Session will begin on Thursday with an address by President Ram Nath Kovind to both Houses of Parliament

The government is also likely to push for the passing of Citizenship Amendment Bill in the Rajya Sabha that has already been passed by the Lok Sabha

Cong to oppose citizenship Bill in RS
