Gadkari launches website to promote ethanol production

Nagpur: Union transport minister Nitin Gadkari recently launched a website www.indiaforethanol.net to create awareness about ethanol production especially among farmers.

At present the website provides information in Hindi but work is going on to translate the matter into 34 regional languages also. A helpline for those interested in ethanol production will also be started soon.

Ajit Parse, developer of the website, told TOI that 80% of India’s crude oil requirement was met through exports which required a large amount of foreign exchange. “We need to reduce our dependence on foreign fuel and biofuels are the only solution. At present only 10% ethanol mixing can be done but this figure can be easily increased to 30%. Our mission’s chemistry expert Hemant Jambhekar has demonstrated that normal vehicles can use petrol and diesel blended with this much ethanol,” he said.

Spice Jet airlines had flew from Dehradun to Delhi using aviation turbine fuel (ATF) blended with 35% ethanol some months ago.

More than a decade ago the then RSS chief KS Sudarshan had mooted the concept of ethanol mixing in India and asked Gadkari to promote it. Since then the BJP leader has been asking farmers to sell their produce to ethanol factories. His family runs Purti Industries, which is a major producer of the biofuel.

Dr APJ Abdul Kalam, former President of India, believed that if farmers were allowed to plant biofuel trees along railway lines and roads then their income would shoot up and they would not commit suicide.

Parse said that ethanol production can also reduce pollution in Delhi and other cities of north India. “Farmers burn their crop residues in winter, which causes air pollution. This residue can easily be converted into ethanol. People will be saved from pollution and the farmers will get money for their waste material,” he added.

Gadkari wants to tell people that higher ethanol content in vehicular fuel is possible. “Brazil runs 100% ethanol driven vehicles and saves a lot of foreign exchange,” said Parse.

“Farmers, businessmen and unemployed youths interested in ethanol production can send their queries through the website. Jambhekar will personally answer them,” Parse further said.

“We also want a biofuel research institute of international standards should come up in Nagpur,” added Parse.



Facebook Twitter Linkedin EMail
