To America, in pomp

In its appearance, the ‘Howdy, Modi!’ event in Houston was a big success. It made for a magnificent spectacle and a visual treat. Prime Minister Narendra Modi was in his element and his address delivered to the rapturous applause of the audience was an exercise in grandstanding. However, only by looking at India through rose-coloured spectacles can we agree with Mr. Modi’s assertion that “everything is fine in India”. Seeing impoverishment, joblessness, farmer distress, mob lynchings, jailing of dissenters and the like and speaking about them are nowadays left to ‘anti-nationals’ and ‘urban Naxals’. One thing that Mr. Trump and Mr. Modi — leaders of predominantly Christian and Hindu nations — share and makes them look similar is their conscious dissociation from Islam. Their allusion to ‘extremist Islamist groups’ as the common enemy and threats from them was not lost on anyone. Mr. Modi opined that Article 370 “benefitted separatists and terrorists”. But he did not explain as to why its dilution by a two-thirds majority in the Parliament was followed by repressive measures and restrictions in the Valley. We couldn’t agree more with Modi when he said, “Diversity is the strength of our democracy.” To add to what he said, it is the defining feature of our democracy.

G. David Milton,

Maruthancode, Tamil Nadu

Let us ask an honest question: What was achieved through this cleverly choreographed extravaganza? Two world leaders who are supposed to be the representatives of the two largest democracies met with much fanfare and pomp. In fact, neither Mr. Modi nor Mr. Trump today actually symbolise what the real India or the real U.S. is meant to be; they represent a grossly distorted view of their countries. True, they are both elected leaders; but that does not add credibility to their their authoritarianism. Mr. Trump represents the deep-rooted bigotry of white supremacy while Mr. Modi represents extreme polarisation based on the ideology of Hindutva. Thinking citizens of both the countries will pause before jumping on the populist bandwagon of such glamour and glitter.

Dr. K. Varkey,

Dindigul, Tamilnadu

In tune with popular Telugu proverb Inta gelichi rachcha geluvu (which means, “First win at home before conquering the world”), Mr. Modi needs to address first the nation’s burning issues such as economic slowdown, falling GDP and rupee and increasing unemployment, farmer suicides, bad loans in banks and so on. Let us see how celebrations and speeches in the U.S. bring investments to India to resolve its issues.

Kshirasagara Balaji Rao,

Hyderabad
