President Alvi stresses civil servants role in country’s development

The nation’s progress and rise to excellence can be achieved through hard work, judicious utilisation of available resources and sincere leadership, and these factors bear fruit only when the civil servants discharge their duties to the best of their abilities and with honesty.

These views were expressed by President Dr Arif Alvi while addressing the participants of 111th National Management Course and Sri Lankan Civil officers and participants of training at the Executive Development Institute (EDI), National School of Public Policy (NSPP) at the Aiwan-e-Sadr, Islamabad on Monday.

An efficient and impartial civil service was the centerpiece of a vibrant system of governance and within the civil service, the role of senior civil servants as leaders and custodians of state interests carries a special importance, said the president.

Alvi advised the officers to keep the betterment of the people in their minds and they should always work toward improving the public service delivery. Delay in resolving peoples’ problems would lead to a sense of deprivation, therefore, procedural requirements should not cause hindrance towards the redressal of people’s problems.

Addressing the Sri Lankan civil officers, the president hoped that the training course would enhance their capabilities and help them in discharging their official responsibilities in an efficient manner. Such courses and trainings were an excellent opportunity to share knowledge and learn from each other’s experiences, he said. Alvi also wished them a pleasant stay in Pakistan.

Fascist Indian leadership was persecuting minorities and hinduizing India, the president said while replying to a question on the prevailing situation in Indian Held Kashmir (IHK). Minorities in India had been living in constant fear, he added. Alvi emphasised that the Will of the people could not be suppressed by power and India too would fail in suffocating the ingenious freedom struggle of the Kashmiris.

He called upon India to immediately stop the use of pellet guns, end the bloodshed, lift the curfew, reverse the clampdown and communications blackout, restore fundamental freedoms and liberties, release political prisoners, stop targeting human rights defenders, and fulfill human rights instruments, as required by International Law.

It was incumbent upon the international community to work for the realisation of right to self-determination for the people of IHK, as they have been suffering at the hands of the Indian fascist regime. This extremist regime has endangered the regional and world peace because of its access to the nuclear button, he added.

The government had inherited multiple economic challenges, but it had taken concrete measures to redress these issues. Resultantly, trade deficit had narrowed down, the number of income tax filers had increased significantly, which would auger well for the documentation of the country’s economy, the president said in reply to question regarding economic challenges. Smuggling and corruption destroy the economy of any nation, therefore, strict measures are required to bridle these menaces, he added.
