SBI fake account warning 2019: State Bank of India advises this to all users

SBI fake account warning 2019 | Photo Credit: Representative Image

Key Highlights SBI has advised the users to interact only with the official social media handles of State Bank of India to safeguard the hard-earned money SBI's official social media handles are present on Facebook, Twitter, Instagram, LinkedIn, Pinterest, Youtube and Quora

New Delhi: With the growing number of fraudulent activities and events of skullduggery, all the scheduled commercial banks, payments banks and most of the microfinance institutions have been taking various precautionary measures with which the chances of such events can be minimised.

State Bank of India, the nation’s largest bank by assets & number of customers, has recently issued a warning to aware the customers about the fake social media accounts. There are instances when customers fall prey to the unauthorised social media account operating in the name of banks and other nationalised institutions. Such fake social media accounts are largely managed by fraudsters.

“Do not invest your time and money interacting with fake accounts on social media. Follow, tag and interact with only the verified, official handles of SBI, to ensure that your comments, complaints and, enquiries get adequately addressed and you are not scammed by fraudsters,” State Bank of India said in a tweet.

SBI has advised the users to interact only with the official social media handles of State Bank of India to safeguard the hard-earned money from fraudsters. The users should always check for the verified sign before following, tagging and interacting on social media, the bank said further. SBI's official social media handles are present on Facebook, Twitter, Instagram, LinkedIn, Pinterest, Youtube and Quora.

Fraud with a bank or an unauthorised transaction increases the pressure on the bank following which the entity has to bear the compensatory losses. According to a media report, as many as 6,801 cases of bank frauds were reported in the financial year 2018-19 itself, which is nearly 15 per cent higher as compared to the total banking frauds reported in the previous fiscal year. The 6,801 bank fraud cases translated into a whopping amount of Rs 71.542.93 crore, news agency PTI had reported citing the Reserve Bank of India (RBI) reply to an RTI query.
