AP CMO Condemns Yellow Media Reports On YS Jagan-KCR Meeting

Amaravati: The AP Chief Minister's Office (CMO) condemned a story published in the yellow media over the meeting between the chief ministers of the two Telugu states—Andhra Pradesh and Telangana. The statement said that the report is ridden with falsehoods and dismissed it as baseless. A few Yellow Media channels published a story on YS Jagan Mohan Reddy and CM K. Chandrashekar Rao saying that they were displeased with the central government. The AP CMO has made it clear that there was no such discussion in the meeting between AP and Telangana Chief Ministers. The CMO also warned yellow media against publishing speculative stories and misleading the public.



AP and Telangana CMs YS Jagan and KCR had a long meeting at Pragati Bhavan in Hyderabad on Monday. "The meeting was centered around the welfare of people of both the Telugu states," the AP Chief Minister's Office said in a statement. "All the Telugu people are aware of the meetings between the two chief ministers for the benefit of the two states over the past four months," officials said.



The CMO also stated that these meetings were not about politics. They discussed the benefits of diverting Godavari waters to the Rayalaseema including the Sagar Right Canal in the Krishna Delta region. With this, the Delta-like Prakasam, old Mahabubnagar, Rangareddy, and Nalgonda districts of Telangana would be greatly benefited. The chief ministers of both the Telugu states had been discussing over the possibilities of water sharing for the benefit of two Telugu states. CMO said that the two chief ministers had discussed sharing of Godavari waters which is all set to become a success.



The two-state chief ministers also discussed over the unresolved issues from the time of AP bifurcation and also about the separation of police officers. The CMO also stated that the CMs had also discussed the training of newly appointed Telangana police constables in AP and over the problems of electricity workers.



The Andhra Pradesh Chief Minister's Office made it clear that at Monday's meeting there was no other matter discussed except about the two Telugu states. The CMO asked the yellow media not to mislead the public by writing imaginary stories on such meetings.

Also Read: BHEL Commissions 5 units Of Kaleshwaram lift Irrigation Project In Telangana
