Ranjan Daimary, nine others get life term

GUWAHATI: The president of National Democratic Front of Boroland (NDFB), Ranjan Daimary alias D R Nabla, was sentenced to life imprisonment by the CBI Special Court here on Wednesday for his involvement in the October 30, 2008 serial blasts in Assam.

In reaction, the NDFB has called for a 12-hour Assam bandh on Thursday in protest against the court verdict and life imprisonment to its leader Ranjan Daimary.

The court earlier on Monday pronounced Ranjan Daimary and others guilty of triggering the serial blasts while terming the NDFB leader as the mastermind of terror attack on innocent people.

Nine others — George Boro, Ajoy Basumatary, Khargeswar Basumatary, Rajen Goyari, Lokra Basumatary, Raju Sarkar, Onsai Boro, Indra Brahma and Baisagi — found guilty in the crime were also sentenced to life imprisonment by the court.

Three other accused — Jayanti Brahma, Mathuram Brahma, Prabhat Boro — were fined and imprisoned for five years for their involvement in the heinous crime. One of the accused had been acquitted by the court.

Meanwhile, the counsel for Ranjan Daimary, Manas Sarania said the verdict of the CBI Special Court would be challenged in the High Court and if required, in the Supreme Court later.

Anjali Daimary, the sister of Ranjan Daimary and a rights activist, apprehended that the verdict might affect the ongoing peace process with the militant outfit. “We would appeal to the government to ensure that the hard earned peace process between the government of India and the outfit is not derailed by the verdict,” Anjali told the media outside the court.

“There are several militant organisations in Assam. If the court here has convicted and imposed punishment on NDFB chief, Ranjan Daimary, the heads of the other militant organisations should also be convicted for their activities,” she said.

Anjali, however, disclosed that her brother now “hoped that the long-pending dream for a separate state, Bodoland, would be created while he served his sentence of life imprisonment.”

NDFB general secretary, B Ohnjalu, in a statement on Wednesday said, “In the light of the life sentence awarded to (NDFB) president, DR Nabla (Ranjan Daimary) and nine other members by the CBI special court, the NDFB declares 12-hour Assam Bandh on January 31, 2019.”

Victim’s father happy

Meanwhile, Kabin Kalita, the father of Samarjit Kalita, who was just 16 when he died in the incident, said he was happy with the court verdict.

“He was my younger son. Though it has been an agonizing wait for over 10 years now, I am happy that life sentences were given to 10 convicted in the case. I would have preferred capital punishment though but at the same time, we have to respect the honourable court’s verdict,” Kalita, who was waiting in front of the court since 10am, told The Shillong Times.
