Indian lockdown of occupied Kashmir enters 51st consecutive day

SRINAGAR – Life continues to get hit across the Occupied Jammu and Kashmir for the 51st consecutive day on Tuesday.

Generally, an environment of fear persists due to heavy military presence across every nook and corner of the valley.

According to the Kashmir media service, the clampdown on communications, including mobile phones and internet, remain in force.

The Srinagar-based Kashmir Press Club while criticizing the unprecedented communications shutdown in the Kashmir valley has said that these unreasonable restrictions are aimed at gagging the press in the territory.

PM Imran appreciates Trump's offer to mediate on ... 08:38 AM | 24 Sep, 2019 NEW YORK - Pakistan and US have reaffirmed their resolve to build a broad-based and mutually-beneficial partnership. ...

Despite India’s inhumane and brutal tactics, the people of Kashmir are determined to continue their liberation struggle till it reaches its logical end. In this regard, posters have appeared in different parts of occupied Kashmir vowing to resist the assault on Kashmir’s distinct identity, religion and civilization, tooth and nail.

On the other hand , the National Investigation Agency is planning to charge sheet Muhammad Yasin Malik along with four other top Hurriyat leaders in fake cases registered against them in 2017. Other three Hurriyat leaders include Shabbir Ahmad Shah, Aasiya Andrabi and Masarrat Aalam Butt. Interestingly, an NIA official admitted that Muhammad Yasin Malik’s real crime is his role in formation of the Joint Resistance Leadership.

Meanwhile, Communications blackout, marked by unprecedented restrictions, continue to remain in place with all shops and other business establishments closed and school buildings empty of students. There is a growing shortage of daily commodities including baby food and medicines. Mobile phone and internet services are suspended while TV channels shut in the territory from 5th of August when India scrapped Kashmir’s special status.

However, the residents watch Pakistani TV channels available on dish as a means to have a real picture of what is going around and the world outside.

Indian claims of alleged terror camps pretext for ... 01:22 PM | 24 Sep, 2019 RAWALPINDI – Director General of Inter-Services Public Relations (ISPR) on Tuesday has termed Indian military ...

Indian media reported that the future of Information Technology sector workers in Kashmir valley was in jeopardy because of the prolonged internet shutdown. Several workers have been dismissed from the employment.
