The Sky Is Pink: The real story of the girl who inspired Priyanka Chopra’s upcoming film

As seen in the trailer, Aisha believes that she is the 'villain' in her parents love story because her illness and eventual death almost split them apart. And in case you didn’t know yet, this film is based on a real story. What’s more, the film has been directed by Shonali Bose, who also lost her 16-year-old son to an accident a few years ago.

While we’re sure Aditi and Niren’s story is all kinds of goals, what you need to hear today is the real story of Aisha Chaudhary.

Real story of The Sky is Pink movie -

Aisha was born with Severe Combined Immuno-Deficiency (SCID), which means that her immune system was severely weak and even a common cold could kill her. To save her from that, she received a bone-marrow transplant at the age of six months. The transplant came at the risk of severely damaging her lungs in the future. And so it did, when Aisha was 13 and was detected with pulmonary fibrosis, which basically refers to a condition where your lung muscles start to harden. She had major difficulties breathing because her lung capacity reduced to only 35%.

Due to this, even simply walking or carrying anything could tire Aisha out easily. This made her unable to do most things kids her age were doing and left her isolated. Soon enough, she had to drop out of her school. But even though all this was happening, Aisha didn’t give up on life. She instead decided to see the joy in whatever part of her life was remaining. Her changed outlook on life inspired her to become a motivational speaker by the time she was 14 because “I must do it because I think I can’t”.

Content This content can also be viewed on the site it originates from.

Soon enough, people recognised Aisha and she even got to speak at INK and TED events. But by the next year, her health deteriorated to the point that she had to start carrying a portable oxygen cylinder with her everywhere she went. Aisha grew very weak and the doctors warned her parents that any upper respiratory tract infection could prove to be fatal for her.
