Pakistan-origin drones trigger alarm, Delhi cops in tizzy

GPS-fitted drones capable of lifting up to 10 kg flew in from Pakistan seven to eight times to airdrop the cache of arms, ammunition.

Punjab payloads trigger alarm

Pakistan-origin drones dropping heavy arms and ammunition in Punjab have alarmed security agencies not just in the border state but also in the national capital.

Intelligence inputs suggest that terror outfits such as Jaish-e-Mohammed (JeM) and Lashkar-e-Taiba (LeT) can use unmanned aerial vehicles (UAVs) not just to drop payloads but also to carry bombs and target crowded areas, dignitaries and vital installations.

"Intelligence agencies have learnt from terror communication intercepts that UAVs can be used for attacks. Conversations on WhatsApp, e-mails, Facebook and Telegram have pointed towards plans of aerial attacks in the city. They also mention details of recently purchased drones from the online market," said an official.

The Delhi Police have issued alert and deployed sleuths in strategic locations to thwart any possible terror attack from the skies. "To prevent any untoward incident in the city, the use of flying objects like drones has been restricted by the police," said a Delhi Police official.

"Whenever a drone is spotted, the control room is immediately informed. We then try to find out details such as the owner of the drone. If no information is found, it is immediately shot down," he said.

The Central Industrial Security Force (CISF) that safeguards airports including the one in Delhi also said the possibility of drones being misused cannot be ruled out. "We need to see if a drone is carrying explosives for security agencies to control it," said CISF spokesperson Hemendra Singh.

"When pilots notice any drone-like object, they inform Air Traffic Control (ATC) that immediately issues an alert to Security Operation Control Center (SOCC) and Airport Operation Control Centre (AOCC). CISF and Delhi Police are also informed," he said.

In August last year, one of the three runways of Indira Gandhi International (IGI) Airport had to be closed for over an hour after the pilot of a Chennai-bound flight spotted an unidentified flying object (UFO). Nine drones and two UFOs have been spotted around the airport since 2010, as per the data provided by the Delhi Police.

The tech search

Multiple agencies are pushing hard for advanced anti-drone technology and training for cops as Delhi airport and VVIP areas have emerged as major aerial terror targets, Mail Today has learnt.

In January, the Union civil aviation ministry invited companies that can provide an effective anti-unmanned aircraft system (UAS) to detect and tackle drones. In June, the ministry roped in private companies from five countries including Russia and Germany to conduct filed trials to target UAVs spotted near airports.

The ministry has again invited global entities to showcase their technology. The ministry is expected to hand over the technology to security agencies when it's made available. This will follow training to capture drones mid-flight and block their communication systems.

"This is all part of a blueprint to secure India's civil airports and prevent drone attacks. It is in advanced stages. An IIT-Bombay alumni company, IdeaForge, has been tasked by CISF to come up with a solution by the year-end. Multiple field trials have been carried out in the past three months in Rohini area of Delhi," said an official.

The constraints

This is being done because anti-drone technology that exists in the market cannot be used to safeguard airports because it will also disrupt flight operations.

"Efforts to hack into drones or jam their signals will also affect cellphone networks and ATC-pilot communications," said Lt Cdr (retired) John Livingstone, founder and executive director, Indian Institute of Drones.

Sanjay Bhatia, Deputy Commissioner of Police (IGI Airport), said that even if a drone is spotted in a no-fly zone, it cannot be immediately shot down. "It may explode and put flights at risk. A proper mechanism is required to deal with these objects," he said.

For now, the CISF is following a temporary standard operating procedure (SOP) to deal with drones near IGI Airport. According to sources, the CISF can neutralise any UFO or drone spotted in a distance range of 500 metres to 1,500 metres, if it poses a threat to airport security.

Lurking danger

Air Commodore (retired) Trilok Chand said that drones may prove to be dangerous in future because, with the development of nanotechnology, the threat is increasing. He, however, said Delhi is well prepared. "Chances of drone attacks are very difficult. Radar systems detect drones easily and they can be hacked into immediately if agencies find anything suspicious," he said.

Aviation expert Harsh Vardhan also said that there is a lurking danger. "Detection of low-flying drones is very difficult. Payload capabilities of drones are increasing by the day, and it is a dangerous sign. There is no mechanism to totally control a drone but agencies are constantly working on it," he said.
