IRCTC to to raise Rs 645 crore via IPO

State-owned Indian Railway Catering and Tourism Corporation (IRCTC) on Wednesday said it is looking to raise up to Rs 645 crore through an initial public offer (IPO). The price band for the offer, after discussion with merchant bankers, has been set at Rs 315-320 per share.

The issue, which will open for subscription on September 30 and closes on October 3, will comprise an offer for sale of 2.01 crore shares (representing 12.50% of total paid-up equity) of the face value of Rs 10 by the ministry of railways. Out of the total issue size, 1.6 lakh equity shares are reserved for the eligible employees, taking the total offer size to 12.6% of the total paid-up equity.

Incorporated on September 27, 1999, IRCTC was conferred with 'the Mini Ratna-I' status, and a central public sector enterprise which is wholly owned by the Government of India under the administrative control of the ministry of railways.

ON FAST TRACK The price band for the offer has been set at Rs 315-320 per share



Lead managers are IDBI Capital Markets & Securities, SBI Capital Markets and YES Securities

IRCTC is the only authorised entity to provide catering services to railways, online railway tickets and packaged drinking water at railway stations and trains in India.

Since it is an offer for sale issue, the online ticketing, tourism and the catering arm of Indian Railways, IRCTC will not receive any proceeds from the offer and all proceeds will go to the Indian government.

The book running lead managers to the offer are IDBI Capital Markets & Securities, SBI Capital Markets and YES Securities (India).

"Through the IPO, we are offloading 12.5% stake and it will bring down the government's stake to 87.5%," chairman and managing director, Mahendra Pratap Mall told reporters on Wednesday.

The stake sale in IRCTC is a part of the government's divestment programme for the current year as decided in the Union Budget 2019. In July, finance minister Nirmala Sitharaman had set a disinvestment target of Rs 1.05 lakh crore for FY20, up from an interim Budget target of Rs 90,000 crore.

In April, the government listed another railway entity Rail Vikas Nigam (RVNL) by selling a 12.2% stake in the company to raise about Rs 480 crore.
