After threat of suicide attack, J&K air bases on high alert

editorial@tribune.com

Tribune News Service

Jammu, September 25

All the Indian Air Force (IAF) bases in Jammu and Kashmir were on Wednesday put on high alert following warning issued by the intelligence agencies against the suicide attacks by Pakistan-based terror group Jaish-e-Mohammad (JeM) on air bases in northern parts of India.

According to official sources, the three airports in Jammu, Srinagar and Leh were closed for all kinds of private vehicles and no private vehicle was allowed to enter these establishments.

“Two Air Force bases of J&K — Srinagar and Jammu — were put on a high alert at ‘orange level’. The luggage of all visitors entering the airports wase thoroughly frisked, while the security agencies guarding airports held an emergency review of security arrangements to tackle the threat,” the sources added.

“The Jammu air base has been put on high alert following the terror threat. All the security agencies are working in close coordination and held a review of arrangements made to make security foolproof. No private vehicle was allowed to enter the airport in view of the terror input,” a top-level security official said.

As per the intelligence inputs, a module of around 8-10 JeM terrorists might carry out a suicide attack against the Indian Air Force in and around Jammu and Kashmir. The alert has been issued against the backdrop of recent reports that Pakistan was transporting weapons through Punjab route to foment trouble in J&K.

On September 12, the J&K and Punjab Police had arrested three JeM terrorists along with arms and ammunition from Lakhanpur, the gateway of J&K, in Kathua, bordering Punjab. The arms and ammunition were being transported to the Kashmir valley from Punjab.

According to the investigative agencies, arms were delivered from Pakistan using heavy-lifting drones via the Punjab border and the consignment was meant to stir trouble in J&K.

Reports suggested that the drones from Pakistan carried out at least eight ‘sorties’ in the last week or 10 days to drop weapons weighing around 80 kg and satellite phones on the Indian soil.
