Some island nations may become uninhabitable due to oceans warning: Climate change report

The latest Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change (IPCC) Special Report adopted in Monaco highlights the urgency of prioritising timely, ambitious and coordinated action to address unprecedented and enduring changes in the ocean and cryosphere.

The findings of the report revealed that major changes in high mountains are affecting downstream communities and glaciers, snow, ice, and permafrost are declining and will continue to do so.

This is projected to increase hazards for people through landslides, avalanches, rockfalls and floods.

Report also warned that smaller glaciers found in Europe, eastern Africa, the tropical Andes and Indonesia are projected to lose more than 80 per cent of their current ice mass by 2100 under high emission scenarios.

This will also affect and alter the water availability and quality downstream, with implications for many sectors such as agriculture and hydropower.

Report accessed by India Today warned the global community of melting ice and rising sea level.

It says glaciers and ice sheets in polar and mountain regions are losing mass, contributing to an increasing rate of sea level rise, together with the expansion of the warmer ocean.

While sea level has risen globally by around 15 cm during the 20th century, it is currently rising more than twice as fast - 3.6 mm per year - and accelerating, the report contended.

Sea level will continue to rise for centuries. It could reach around 30-60 cm by 2100 even if greenhouse gas emissions are sharply reduced and global warming is limited to well below 2°C, but around 60-110 cm if greenhouse gas emissions continue to increase strongly.

These changes in the ecosystem will be exposed to escalating flood risks, the report showed. Some island nations are likely to become uninhabitable due to climate-related ocean and cryosphere change, the report revealed.

Subsequently increases in tropical cyclone winds and rainfall are exacerbating extreme sea level events and coastal hazards. Hazards will further be intensified by an increase in the average intensity, the magnitude of storm surge and precipitation rates of tropical cyclones, especially if greenhouse gas emissions remain high.

IPCC report suggested that the ecosystem of sea is also changing rapidly. To date, the ocean has taken up more than 90 per cent of the excess heat in the climate system. By 2100, the ocean will take up 2 to 4 times more heat than between 1970 and the present if global warming is limited to 2°C, and up to 5 to 7 times more at higher emissions. Ocean warming reduces mixing between water layers and, as a consequence, the supply of oxygen and nutrients for marine life, the report highlighted.

The IPCC report findings also revealed that strongly reducing greenhouse gas emissions, protecting and restoring ecosystems, and carefully managing the use of natural resources would make it possible to preserve the ocean and cryosphere.

Also Read | New climate report: Oceans rising faster, ice melting more

Also Watch | 'How dare you?' Teenage activist Greta Thunberg's fiery speech at UN Climate Summit baffles world leaders




