Police arrest three for thrashing man who said 'India is a Hindu nation, Muslims should not come here'

Man beaten up for saying 'India is a country of Hindus' | Photo Credit: ANI

Key Highlights An insurance agent was thrashed by a group of students in Mangaluru mall who made the comments The police have arrested three members of the group who beat up the man The incident occurred after the man interfered in a conversation that the group of students were having

Mangaluru: The police arrested three youths after they beat up a man for allegedly saying ‘India is a Hindu nation’. The incident occurred at a mall in Mangaluru on Wednesday when an insurance agent made the comments that “India is a Hindu nation and Muslims should not come here”.

A video of the incident went viral in which the man could be seen being beaten up inside the mall. The violence occurred at a mall in Pandeshwar area of the city when a man interfered where a group of students from the minority community were discussing national issues, said reports.

The insurance agent had come to meet a client in the same mall and was withing earshot of the students. After hearing their conversation he walked up to the debating group and made the comments.

K'taka: In a viral video a man can be seen being beaten up by a group of people at a mall in Mangaluru,after he allegedly claimed 'India is a Hindu nation. Muslims should not come here.' Case registered. Mangaluru Police Commissioner says "We'll investigate.Police has good leads" pic.twitter.com/1IQvAqPr3x — ANI (@ANI) September 26, 2019

The complainant, Manujnath, was told off by the group but he did not pay heed to their threats after which a heated argument ensured. The man was then beaten up by the group. The video of the incident went viral on social media bringing media attention to the matter.

The police reportedly named the accused as Mohiyuddin Safwan and Abdul Rahim Saad and promised action against them under the Juvenile Justice Act. The police appealed to the public not to circulate the video and sensationalise the matter.

A case was registered in Mangaluru South Police station regarding the incident.

The incident is sensitive in the background of a panic-like state in some quarters of the city after fear-mongering messages were circulated by miscreants.

“Please pray for peace during the next ten days in Mangalore as there will be a huge riot set up by VHP and RSS on 29 September in the name of the fight against conversion by Christian missionaries. Many of the media channels are threatened to convey wrong messages,” reads a fear-mongering message being circulated on WhatsApp and social media.

The police authorities have rubbished the message and asked for people to maintain calm.
