Turkey, Malaysia, Pakistan to launch Islamic TV channel: PM Imran

UNITED NATIONS: Prime Minister Imran Khan on Thursday said Pakistan, Turkey and Malaysia have decided to launch an English language channel to confront multiple challenges, including those of Islamophobia.



In a post on Twitter, PM Imran said, "President Erdogan, PM Mahatir and myself had a meeting today in which we decided our three countries would jointly start an English language channel dedicated to confronting the challenges posed by Islamophobia and setting the record straight on our great religion - Islam."

"Misperceptions which bring people together against Muslims would be corrected; issue of blasphemy would be properly contextualised; series & films would be produced on Muslim history to educate/inform our own people and the world; Muslims would be given a dedicated media presence," PM Imran added.

On Wednesday, the prime minister attended a high-level, roundtable discussion on ‘Countering Hate Speech’ co-hosted by Pakistan and Turkey.

The prime minister in his address called for effective measures to counter hate speech and Islamophobia, stressing upon the importance of addressing both the causes and consequences of these phenomena.

Noting the growing incidents of discrimination and violence based on religion and belief, PM Imran underscored that religion had nothing to do with terrorism.

He also cautioned against attempts to defame the revered personalities and scriptures, cloaked in the claim for right to freedom of expression and opinion.

The prime minister pointed out that marginalisation of any community could lead to its radicalisation.

Turkish President Recep Tayyip Erdogan, in his remarks, said Muslims were the most vulnerable community to hate speech across the world.

Muslims were being lynched for eating beef in India, whereas, Indian occupied Kashmir had turned into an open prison, he said, warning that they fear bloodshed in the occupied valley.

President Erdogan termed hate speech as among the worst crimes against humanity.
