Would be miraculous if we give verdict in 4 weeks; not a day after October 18 for hearing: SC on Ayodhya case

SC directs Hindu, Muslim parties to complete arguments by October 18 | Photo Credit: PTI

Key Highlights SC tells plaintiffs in Ayodhya case to complete their arguments by October 18 deadline Five-judge constitution bench asked Hindu and Muslim parties to set time frame for completing arguments with deadline in mind

New Delhi: The Supreme Court (SC) on Thursday specified that it cannot grant one extra day beyond the October 18 deadline set for both the parties to make their arguments in the Ram Janmabhoomi-Babri Masjid land dispute case.

The five-member constitution bench headed by Chief Justice of India (CJI) Ranjan Gogoi reiterated the need to complete arguments by the deadline - October 18 - set upon consent from both Hindu and Muslim parties.

"There will not be any extra day after October 18. It will be miraculous if we deliver the judgement in four weeks in the matter," Chief Justice Gogoi said.

The Bench asked the plaintiffs to specify the time frame for completing their arguments with the deadline in mind.

The comments by the SC bench came after Muslim parties argued that the report of the Archaeological Survey of India (ASI) cannot be questioned, a deviation from a stance taken by them earlier.

Senior Advocate Rajeev Dhavan representing the Mulsim plaintiffs told the five-judge constitution bench of the SC, that they do not wish to challenge the authorship of the 2003 ASI report.

"It is not expected that every page is to be signed. The authorship of the report and the summary need not be questioned. If we had wasted my lords time, then we apologise for that. There is no point going into that.

"The report in question has an author and we are not questioning the authorship," Dhavan said apologising for wasting the apex court’s time.

Meenakshi Arora, another lawyer representing the Muslim parties, on Wednesday, questioned the ASI report saying every chapter in the report was attributed to an author while the summary was not.

The constitutional bench remarked that Dhavan “has not given up his right to question the report but the evidence cannot be discredited after being accepted by the court”.

The five-member bench also comprises Justices SA Bobde, DY Chandrachud, Ashok Bhushan and S Abdul Nazeer other than CJI.


