Al Qaeda, ISIS plotting to attack Jews, Israelis in India during holiday season: Intel agencies

File image | Photo Credit: BCCL

Key Highlights Indian intel agencies received inputs from foreign counterparts Input warns terror groups plotting to target Israelis in India Terror groups want to target Israel over its support to India on the abrogation of Article 370

New Delhi: Intelligence agencies have issued a fresh alert with regard to the upcoming festive season. The agencies have issued a warning that terrorist groups like the al Qaeda and outfits associated with the Islamic State (ISIS) are plotting to target Jewish and Israeli communities during their holiday season in September and October.

States having significant populations of these communities have been alerted by the agencies about likely terror attacks.

It may be noted that the Jewish community celebrates a number of holidays between September and October, starting with Rosh HaShanah (Jewish New Year) from September 29 and October 1, Yom Kippur (the holiest day in Judaism) on October 8 and 9, and Sukkot between October 13 and October 22, news agency ANI reported.

The report said the Indian intelligence agencies have been alerted by their counterparts in foreign nations about the plot to attack the Israeli Embassy in New Delhi. On target are also schools and hotels frequented by Israelis.

Since Israel had backed India over its move to abrogate Article 370 of the Constitution that granted special status to Jammu and Kashmir, terror outfits are miffed with that country and are plotting to target Israelis living in India.

During the Jewish holiday season in September and October, a large number of tourists also come to India from Israel.

"Al Qaeda and terrorist cells affiliated with IS are looking to mount attacks on Israeli targets worldwide. In view of the same, the possible targets in India may include Israeli Embassy in New Delhi, synagogues, Jewish schools, restaurants and hotels frequented by Israeli nationals in New Delhi and other cities," according to the input.

Local police and local intelligence units have been asked by the central intelligence agencies to take preventive and precautionary measures so that any such attacks could be prevented. Further, security has already been tightened outside Israeli and Jewish institutions, including Chabad Houses in Delhi. The residences of prominent Israelis are also being kept under a close watch for any suspicious activity outside the premises.
