Mumbai: PMC bank account holders create WhatsApp groups, plan protests across the city

Punjab and Maharashtra Co-Operative (PMC) bank account holders are creating WhatsApp groups and planning to protest across Mumbai.



A 48-year-old woman named Suman Gupta, who is a resident of Poonam Nagar was an account holder in Punjab and Maharashtra Co-Operative (PMC) bank for the last 19 years.



Suman had saved Rs 16 lakh as Fixed Deposit(FD) for her children's education.



Suman's elder daughter was to secure an admission in ITM for a management course. The fees have to be paid in October but now with the bank being put under restrictions, she does not know how to pay for her daughter's education.



Manjari Gupta, a resident of Greenfields in Jogeshwar East lives by herself. Her children study abroad. Manjari's source of income is the rent that she gets from a house but the main source of income is the interest from her Fixed Deposits(FD) in the bank. But with the bank now only giving Rs 1,000 in 6 months, she has nowhere to go for her daily expenses.



Both Manjari and Suman have now decided to be a part of this protest against the PMC bank.



Suman said, "For the last three days, I have been thinking over this issue and it is giving me a headache. I feel I'll have a heart attack."



Bharat Kamble, who is also a resident of Jogeshwari East had to face similar issues due to the restrictions imposed by the RBI. Kamble's daughter-in-law had moved to a new house in Kharghar in Navi Mumbai. She had recently received a letter from CIDCO asking for the first installment of the house.



Kamble had to make the digital payment to CIDCO from his bank account which he couldn't due to the restrictions.



"They have given me a paper which lists emergencies like medical, marriage, etc. But my emergency is not even listed here. I don't know what will happen," says Kamble.



A tourist vehicle driver named Dhananjay Kulkarni has a Fixed Deposit (FD) of Rs 4 lakh. He is also receiving Rs 1,000 for six months.



SB Pal, who works at the Mumbai airport used to receive his salary in the Punjab and Maharashtra Co-Operative bank account. With RBI putting up restrictions on the bank, the first thing Pal did was to get his salary account changed.



An old man who has six accounts in the PMC bank says that he was under the impression that he will at least get Rs 1,000 from each account which makes it a total of Rs 6,000. But he has been told by the bank that he will only get Rs 1,000.



A petrol pump owner fears that his pump will run dry as he had Rs 95 lakh which he had to transfer to a petroleum company so that he could get petrol.



Congress' Sanjay Nirupam has alleged that BJP leader Tara Singh and his son and a few others are involved in this. He said they should be investigated. Nirupam was planning to visit the RBI headquarter and protest against troubling small account holders.



Over the last few decades, Punjab and Maharashtra Co-operative Bank(PMC) has opened many branches across Mumbai, Thane, and other districts in Maharashtra.

The Reserve Bank (RBI) has imposed several restrictions on the Punjab and Maharashtra Co-operative (PMC) Bank for six months. According to the new restrictions, the bank cannot issue loans or open fixed deposit accounts for the next six months.

However, what is most troubling for account holders is that the RBI has set a Rs 1000-withdrawal limit on transactions.

Also read: RBI cracks whip on PMC Bank, sets Rs 1000-withdrawal limit, panicked customers throng branches

ALSO WATCH| Cash crunch deja vu: Political battles crop up as citizens become collateral damage
