Imran to ask UN to intervene and avoid nuclear conflict

NEW YORK: Prime Minister Imran Khan has said that he will ask the United Nations to intervene to defuse tensions between India and Pakistan over occupied Kashmir when he addresses the UN General Assembly on Friday.

“If the UN doesn’t speak about it, who is going to speak about it?,” Mr Khan asked in an interview to The New York Times published on Thursday.

In another interview, to Al Jazeera, the prime minister warned the international community that the Kashmir dispute could lead to a nuclear conflict between India and Pakistan.

“Pakistan would never start a war, and I am clear: I am a pacifist, I am anti-war, I believe that wars do not solve any problems,” he said. “When two nuclear-armed countries fight, if they fight a conventional war, there is every possibility that it is going to end up into nuclear war.”

Mr Khan also discussed his upcoming speech at the UN General Assembly in an interview to MSNBC television and said he was open to US President Donald Trump mediating between Pakistan and India. Mr Trump has been offering his services to mediate a truce between the two nuclear-armed nations, but New Delhi continues to reject his offers.

“Definitely, we feel that the US president, the head of the most powerful nation, is the only person who can make a difference right now,” said the prime minister when asked if he would like Mr Trump to intervene.

“It’s a huge humanitarian crisis brewing up. We hope that the US president intervenes.”

When an MSNBC correspondent asked if Pakistan had started preparing itself for a nuclear war, he said: “No sane mind can think of nuclear war or nuclear weapons. But this thing should be immediately nipped in the bud … the US president needs to intervene before it goes out of control.”

To The New York Times, Mr Khan said he would ask the United Nations to step in, warning that it was too risky to allow tensions to escalate between India and Pakistan, both of which have nuclear weapons. “This is the UN’s job,” he said, adding: “They have to intervene, send observers there.”

Laurel Miller, director of the Asia Programme at the International Crisis Group, however, told NYT that India would never accept this proposal. “I can’t imagine India agreeing to it, and the UN isn’t going to intervene over India’s objections,” she said. She, however, acknowledged that India’s attitude could change if widespread violence broke out in occupied Kashmir.

Prime Minister Khan said that’s exac­tly what would happen as India would one day be forced to relax its siege in the disputed Valley. “This is very dangerous,” he said, “because people don’t rea­lise where it’s headed. It’s going to be a massacre, the moment they lift the curfew.”

Mr Khan said he was not optimistic that he would accomplish anything in his speech to the United Nations, at least not in the near term. “But at least the world will be aware,” he said. “Because I fear an impending genocide.”

To Al Jazeera, PM Khan said he was a pacifist but his efforts to calm down the hostility were overshadowed by his condemnation of India and the potential for violence between the two countries.

Asked if tensions could cause an “accidental war”, he said it was a definite possibility. “If say Pakistan, God forbid, we are fighting a conventional war, we are losing, and if a country is stuck between the choice: either you surrender or you fight ‘til death for your freedom, I know Pakistanis will fight to death for their freedom,” he said. “So, when a nuclear-armed country fights to the end, to the death, it has consequences.”

The prime minister also raised this point in his news conference on Monday, saying that since he came to New York, he has been trying to alert world leaders to the growing risk of conflict with India over Kashmir.

Although India has been trying to play down the risk of a nuclear conflict, the international media, while reporting Mr Khan’s warning, noted that this possibility should not be ruled out.

Mr Khan predicted a popular backlash against India’s Aug 5 revocation order in his news conference. “They’ll come out on the streets. What happens then?” he said. “I fear there will be a massacre and things will start to go out of control.”

Published in Dawn, September 27th, 2019
