Kashmir conflict causes tension in NJ suburbs ahead of prime minister's speech at UN

When India's prime minister visits the United Nations on Friday, New Jersey’s South Asian communities will be ready to greet him — some as supporters and others as fierce critics.

Prime Minister Narendra Modi has been a popular yet polarizing figure who has touted Indian nationalism, strength and development. Critics say he also has fueled prejudice against non-Hindu minorities and violated human rights after restricting autonomy this summer in Kashmir, the long-disputed, Muslim-majority region sandwiched between India and Pakistan.

The tensions have spilled into the suburbs of New Jersey, where communities are holding dueling protests and engaging in a war of words over the politics that have roiled their homelands.

“People from cross-sections of India, everybody supports the prime minister,” said Pramod Bhagat, a Parsippany resident who is helping to organize a pro-Modi rally outside the U.N. “There is so much misinformation being passed around, we can get carried away. It’s like our president says: It’s fake news.”

The story continues below the gallery.

Teaneck’s Democratic Municipal Committee, on the other hand, passed a resolution Sept. 9 that calls on elected officials to “speak out against the human rights violations in India by the Hindu nationalist government.”

The resolution criticizes the Indian government over a surge in hate crimes and calls for India to "restore democracy in Kashmir."

“I felt that in India the diversity was actually strength. People got along,” said Shahanaz Arjumand, a member of the Democratic committee. She blamed Modi's political party — the BJP, or Bharatiya Janata Party — for stoking nationalism.

Kashmir conflict hits NJ town halls

In New Jersey, South Asian communities have stood alongside one another at cultural celebrations, political forums and anti-hate events, but they’ve also disagreed over Modi’s leadership. Tensions rose after India voided an article of its constitution that granted semi-autonomy to Kashmir on Aug. 5. Modi then imposed a curfew and restricted communications within the territory.

Kashmir has been contested since the partition of the Indian subcontinent in 1947, sparking two wars and numerous skirmishes between the two sides. Modi cited security concerns for his latest move, saying it was necessary to stop terrorist and separatist threats. On Tuesday, Pakistani Prime Minister Imran Khan warned that war is possible again, while calling the Indian leader a “racist."

In New Jersey, Indian-American supporters said Modi was right.

“Kashmir is an integral part of India and belongs to India,” said Dinesh Desai, a Paramus resident who said Indian rule would help Kashmiris who have endured state corruption and inequality.

So enthusiastic was their support that two weeks after Modi changed the constitution, several Indian-American groups hosted an event in Edison with the national general secretary of the BJP to celebrate the Kashmir decision.

Meanwhile, a Stand with Kashmir movement has gained support in New Jersey with support from Muslim groups and progressive organizations. Protests took place the past two weekends in Teaneck and New Brunswick, drawing about 100 people each, organizers said.

“We want them to end the curfew so they can progress normally, kids can go to school, people can go back to work, and people can get medical care they need,” said East Brunswick resident Erum Shakir, an activist whose family is from Pakistan.

U.N. High Commissioner for Human Rights Michelle Bachelet said this month that she was "deeply concerned" about the crackdown in Kashmir, and advocacy groups Human Rights Watch and Amnesty International have criticized what they call arbitrary detentions and arrests. The Indian government has since eased some of the restrictions.

Tensions in New Jersey have been most apparent in Edison, where a Pakistani-American leader’s fiery pro-Kashmir speech prompted demands for his resignation from the town’s Planning Board.

Sam Khan, chairman of the Edison-based American Muslim Council, said in a speech posted on Facebook on Aug. 26 that Pakistanis and Muslims have a duty to undertake a “jihad” to stop what’s happening in Kashmir, using the Arabic word that means strive or struggle.

If you are unable to do jihad, "you must stop it with your own hands, you must stop it with your tongue," he said, according to two translations from Urdu.

In a statement he later shared online, Khan said his words “are being misrepresented and twisted to portray me as a radical person promoting violence.”

Nearly 2,500 people have signed a petition saying Khan used hate speech and calling for him to step down. Another petition with close to 1,500 signatures defends him as a man of peace and supports his advocacy for Kashmir.

Supporters and critics packed a board meeting in Edison — home to about 30,000 Indian-Americans — days after his speech to voice their opinions over the matter.

Modi at the United Nations

Last Sunday, about 50,000 Indian-Americans descended on a stadium in Houston to hear Modi speak at an event called “Howdy, Modi,” where President Donald Trump praised the prime minister. Supporters see Modi as a leader who is building up India on the world stage.

“He just got elected for the second time and he has got a majority of seats” in India's parliament, said Sangay Mishra, an assistant professor of political science at Drew University and author of "Desis Divided: The Political Lives of South Asian Americans."

Still, he said, there are also people who oppose Modi because of the nationalism he promotes, which Mishra said has led to the marginalization of minorities, including Muslims and Christians.

International:Hundreds hear Colombian president speak in New Jersey

Trending:Hijabi police officer recognized as a ‘leader among peers’ at academy graduation

“[Modi] has emerged as a popular figure in Indian politics,” Mishra added, “but at the same time he is very, very confrontational for the kind of politics he espouses and the kind of politics in which he wants to shape India.”

Ahmed, a Teaneck resident who was born in Kashmir, was visiting family in his native country in August and described it as a “warlike” situation, with police cracking down on protests and imposing a severe curfew that permitted people to leave home only one or two hours a day.

Ahmed did not want his last name used, saying he could be denied future visas to visit Kashmir. He plans to take a bus from the Darul Islah mosque in Teaneck on Friday to to join protests outside the U.N.

Arjumand, the Teaneck Democrat, hopes pressure will lead to humanitarian help for Kashmiris. She said she's not worried about divisions in New Jersey.

“I am least concerned about what it does here,” she said. “I am really concerned about what it does to Kashmiris and human rights violations. We may discuss, debate and have divisions, but I think we still have conversations while they are fighting for their lives.”
