Ground report: Secunderabad colony recalls nightmare as water enters homes after rains

A car almost got washed away near Manasarovar heights in Trimulgherry, Secunderabad when it tried to cross the flooded road without realising the intensity of the water current on Friday. Fortunately, the car withstood the pressure of the gushing waters due to the support of the fence at the edge of the road. After the water levels receded in the morning, the car was towed away using a tractor, locals said.

Due to heavy rainfall on Thursday evening, water from the Alwal lake overflowed and flooded the entire colony of Sai Sagar Enclave near Mansarovar Heights, forcing the residents to stay inside their houses affecting daily life; other residents who worked night shifts had to book OYO rooms or take shelter at their friends’ place. The colony has at least 50 families.

A car almost got washed away near Mansarovar Heights, Trimulgherry due to overflowing water coming from Alwal lake. The entire street is flooded affecting the daily life of residents. #Hyderabadrains pic.twitter.com/4fFaaxuuZ9 — Bala (@naartthigan) September 27, 2019

“I couldn’t go to college today. How can I cross this water? Several employees who work night shift had to book OYO rooms and stay there. It was practically impossible to reach their homes,” said Kranthi Swaroop, a resident of Sai Sagar Enclave.

According to residents of Sai Sagar Enclave, their street had flooded at 2am. “The water level could have been at least more than 3 feet, it could have washed away anyone who dared to walk through it,” exclaimed Shravan Kumar, another resident.

As most of the buildings in the colony are constructed on an elevated platform, water did not enter their homes. However, the families of Ramulu and Kurmaiah and others who stay in shanties at the ground level weren’t as lucky. Water had entered their homes, and they had to seek shelter near a shop for the whole night.

“We were awake throughout the night. When the water started entering the house, we grabbed a blanket and took shelter at this shop,” Kurmaiah said pointing to the shop next to his house.

Ramulu, a resident of Sai Sagar Enclave

“Books of our children, the groceries, everything got drenched in the water. As a result, our children couldn’t go to school,” he said.

Ramulu, Kurmaiah’s neighbour added, “As all our groceries got ruined in the water, we could eat our breakfast only after buying fresh groceries late in the noon.”

Ramulu said that two years ago too, they faced a similar situation where they had to take shelter in one of the apartments for almost a week.

Trimulgherry area falls under the jurisdiction of Secunderabad Cantonment Board. However, locals allege that no authorities or political leader came to visit them.

As the southwest monsoon is active in Telangana, Hyderabad has been receiving heavy rainfall for the past few days. On Thursday, Trimulgherry received 12 cm of rainfall, according to Telangana State Development Planning Society.

Water flowing through Sai Sagar Enclave, near Manasarovar Heights. The colony is practically inaccessible. #Hyderabadrains pic.twitter.com/XfHOgUmBLY — Bala (@naartthigan) September 27, 2019

Meanwhile, the Indian Meteorological Department has issued a warning for heavy rainfall on Friday.
