Can’t rule out ‘big incident’ on India’s coastline by terrorists from neighbouring country: Rajnath Singh

Defence Minister Rajnath Singh | Photo Credit: IANS

Key Highlights Rajnath Singh says govt committed to strengthen coastal security Big incident on coastline a possibility, says defence minister Rajnath says the nation should remember the sacrifices of martyrs

Kollam: Union Defence Minister Rajnath Singh said on Friday said while the government was working to strengthen coastal and maritime security, it was difficult to rule out a big incident on the country’s coastline carried out by terrorists from the neighbouring country.

In Kerala’s Kollam for the 66th birthday celebrations of Mata Amritanandamayi Devi, Singh issued a warning to India’s adversaries and said the country would not let anyone who bothered us "rest in peace". He said this while referring to the Indian Air Force’s air strikes in Pakistan’s Balakot in February conducted after the Pulwama terror attack in which 40 CRPF jawans were martyred.

"We cannot rule out that our neighbouring country's terrorists can carry out a big incident on our coastline which extends from Kutch to Kerala. As a Defence Minister I would like to assure that our country's maritime security is absolutely strong and solidified. We are completely committed to coastal and maritime security," he said, speaking at the event.

“I can say that we are capable of preventing a repeat of what happened in Mumbai in 2008,” Singh added, stating that the Navy was capable of averting incidents like the 26/11 Mumbai terror attacks.

Recalling the Pulwama attack which happened when he was the Home Minister, Singh said no one in India would ever be able to forget the sacrifices of the soldiers who died in the February 14 attack.

"You know that after some days of Pulwama incident, our Air Force conducted air strikes at Balakot in Pakistan. We do not bother anyone, but if anyone bothers us, we will not let them rest in peace,” he said.

Rajnath called on the countrymen and urged them not to forget that the soldiers who lay their lives for the country also have their parents.

"The country that does not remember the sacrifice of its soldiers, it is not respected anywhere in the world. We should stand with them and honour the sacrifice made by the martyr of their family," he said.

"We can't ignore the possibility of an attack by terrorists from our neighbouring country in coastal areas. As the Defence Minister of the country, I want to assure you that our country's maritime security is strong.
