Capt Warns of Strict Action Against Undue Notice to Industry By Excise & Taxation Dpt

Capt Warns of Strict Action Against Undue Notice

Chandigarh, January 31: The Punjab Chief Minister Captain Amarinder Singh on Thursday warned of strict action against any officials of the Excise & Taxation Department for issuing any undue tax assessment notices to industry. The Chief Minister has asked the Excise and Taxation Commissioner to ensure that no such notices are issued by the department. He has also directed the Tax Department to make post on its portal list of all notices issued with prior approval of the competent authority so that any discrepancy can be rectified to the satisfaction of industry.

He asked the Finance Minister to hold a meeting soon with the delegation to elicit their views before finalising the state Budget for 2019-20. The directives came during a meeting with a delegation of Punjab Pradesh Veopar Mandal, who thanked the Chief Minister for boosting ease of business for the industry in the state.

Advertisement

Assuring the delegation of full government support and cooperation in all respects, Captain Amarinder also asked the Excise & Taxation Department to further expedite the process of pending VAT and GST refunds to industry. On the request of the delegation to settle all pending tax assessment cases by introducing Deemed Assessment, Captain Amarinder Singh asked the department to examine the proposal for its feasibility.

On the demand to enhance exemption limit for generating Electronic Way Bill, the Chief Minister said he would take up the issue with the GST Council. On the issue of oil feed being included within the purview of State Cattlefeed Act, the Chief Minister asked the department to immediately examine the proposal. Captain Amarinder also asked his Special Principal Secretary to look into the issue of inflated power bills in excess of Rs. 5 per unit, which was brought to his notice by the delegation.

Advertisement

Delegation president Pyare Lal Seth lauded the Chief Minister for successfully raising the issue of Rs 31,000 Crores foodgrains overhang imposed on the state. He requested Captain Amarinder for give more financial incentives to existing small scale units to further boost industrial output. Appreciating the Chief Minister for creating and nurturing a positive industrial sentiment in state in last two years, Seth assured of all support in the government’s efforts to make Punjab prosper again.

During the meeting, members requested the Chief Minister for revival of district traders boards across the state, besides setting up of a dedicated steel yard in Amritsar. The demand for establishing a focal point at Sirhind and introduction of insurance scheme for small traders was also raised. Some members also urged the Chief Minister to create a state ground water authority for smooth resolution of industry’s water related issues.

Advertisement

The meeting was also attended by Education Minister OP Soni, Media Advisor to CM Raveen Thukral, Excise and Taxation Commissioner Vivek Pratap Singh, Special Principal Secretary to CM Gurkirat Kirpal Singh, Additional Principal Secretary to CM Girish Dayalan, besides office bearers of various industrial and traders’ associations from across the state.
