India exercises right to reply at UN after Imran Khan's speech, says Pakistan PM's threat of nuclear war qualifies as 'brinksmanship'-India News , Firstpost

India on Friday said that Pakistan prime minister Imran Khan's threat of unleashing nuclear devastation qualifies as 'brinksmanship, not statesmanship'

In a strong reply to Imran Khan's UNGA address on Kashmir issue, Vidisha Maitra, first secretary to Ministry of External Affairs (MEA) said that the Pakistani prime minister's threat of unleashing nuclear devastation qualified as "brinksmanship" and not statesmanship.

Exercising India's right to reply to Khan's speech, Maitra said, "Citizens of India do not need anyone else to speak on their behalf, least of all those who have built an industry of terrorism from the ideology of hate."

"I take the floor to exercise India's right of reply to the statement made by the prime minister of Pakistan. Every word spoken from the podium of this august Assembly, it is believed, carries the weight of history," she said.

Full text of India's response to Imran Khan's speech at the 74th UNGA session:

Ind Pak Unga by Sukanya Ray on Scribd

"Unfortunately, what we heard today from Prime Minister Imran Khan of Pakistan was a callous portrayal of the world in binary terms. Us versus them; rich versus poor; north versus south; developed versus developing; Muslims versus others. A script that fosters divisiveness at the United Nations. Attempts to sharpen differences and stir up hatred are simply put - hate speech," she continued.

The first secretary to MEA also asked if Islamabad would acknowledge its position as the "only government in the world that provides pension to an individual listed by the UN".

"Will Pakistan acknowledge that it is the only government in the world that provides pension to an individual listed by the UN in the Al-Qaeda and Daesh sanctions list?" she asked.

She was referring to global terrorists like Hafiz Saeed, whose organisation Jammat-ud-Dawa was banned in December, 2008, by the United Nations Security Council after the 26/11 Mumbai attacks in which 166 people were killed.

Further slamming the Pakistani prime minister, Maitra said that for someone who was once a cricketer and believed in the "gentleman's game", Khan's Friday's speech "bordered on crudeness of the variety that is reminiscent of the guns of Darra Adam Khel".

While Pakistan representative was seen carefully taking notes, Maitra addressed prime minister with his full name, Imran Khan Niazi. "Prime Minister Imran Khan's threat of unleashing nuclear devastation qualifies as brinkmanship, not statesmanship," Maitra said.

"Pakistan's virulent reaction to the removal of an outdated and temporary provision that was hindering development and integration of the Indian state of Jammu and Kashmir stems from the fact that those who thrive on conflict never welcome the ray of peace," she added.

During his address, Khan warned of dire "consequences" in the event of a nuclear war with India over the Kashmir issue. "If a conventional war starts between the two countries anything could happen. A country seven times smaller than its neighbour what will it do — either surrender or fight for its freedom," he had said in his maiden address to the UN General Assembly that exceeded beyond the allotted time limit of between 15 to 20 minutes.

"My belief is we will fight and when a nuclear-armed country fights till the end it will consequence far beyond the borders. I am warning you. It's not a threat but worry about where are we heading. If this goes wrong you hope for the best but prepare for the worst," Khan said.

With inputs from PTI
