Pakistan's PM Creating Content For Cartoonists: Rajnath Singh

Pakistan Prime Minister Imran Khan is going door-to-door around the world and creating content for cartoonists, Defence Minister Rajnath Singh said on Saturday. Speaking after commissioning the INS Khanderi submarine at the dockyard of the Mazgaon Dock Shipbuilders Limited in Mumbai, he said there are some powers who want to do a Mumbai-like attack on Indian coastal regions, but "their desires will not be allowed to be fulfilled".

READ: INS Khanderi, India's 2nd Scorpene-class Submarines Inducted Into Navy

Rajnath Singh hits at Pakistan

"Pakistan needs to understand that the Indian Navy has become much stronger with the commissioning of the Khanderi, and the government is committed to strengthen the armed forces," Singh said, adding that the navy will take strict action against those who disturb peace in the region.

READ: Here's How India Exposed Pakistan's 'no Terrorists' Lie At UNGA

Attacking Khan, a day after his speech at the UN General Assembly, the Minister said, "The Pakistan Prime Minister is going from door-to-door around the world and creating content for cartoonists."

On the submarine's commissioning, he said, "It is a matter of immense pride that India is one of the few countries which can build its own submarines."

INS Khanderi inducted into Indian Navy

Defence Minister Rajnath Singh commissioned India's second Scorpene-class submarine INS Khanderi into service in Mumbai on Saturday. The submarine possesses superior stealth and other major combat capabilities. The Defence Minister will also launch INS Nilgiri, the first ship of the P-17A frigates, along with an aircraft carrier drydock will be inaugurated on Saturday.

Vice Admiral G Ashok Kumar, the vice chief of the Navy had asserted that with the commissioning of 'Khanderi' and launch of 'Nilgiri', the combat potential of Indian Navy will "go up many folds". He had added that the aircraft carrier drydock, housed within the Naval Dockyard in Mumbai, is capable of docking India's largest ship INS Vikramaditya and has the ability to maintain ships for decades to come.

India: Pakistan Only Nation Giving Pension To UN-designated Terrorist

Rajnath Singh on coastal and maritime security

Earlier on Friday, Defence Minister Rajnath Singh said that the government is strictly committed to coastal and maritime security as an attack by terrorists cannot be ruled out.

"We cannot rule out that our neighbouring country's terrorists can carry out a big incident on our coastline which extends from Kutch to Kerala. As a Defence Minister, I would like to assure that our country's maritime security is absolutely strong and solidified. We are completely committed to coastal and maritime security," he said.

Rajnath Singh: Can't Rule Out A Terrorist Incident On Coastline By Pak
