Pakistan warns of potential nuclear war with India on Kashmir

Pakistani Prime Minister Imran Khan warned the world that the worsening situation in Indian-administered Jammu and Kashmir has the potential to bring two nuclear powers to the brink of war.

A conventional war between Pakistan and India will have consequences beyond borders. It is a "warning, not threat", he told the UN General Assembly.

Khan slammed Indian Prime Minister Narendra Modi's "cruel" policies in Kashmir and said "if Pakistan is left without a choice," it will "fight until the end."

"When a nuclear-armed country fight to the end it will have consequences far beyond the borders. It will have consequences for the world."

He urged Indian authorities to exercise restraint and warned of a "bloodbath" if necessary steps in Kashmir are not taken.

"When the curfew is lifted and millions of people face 900,000 Indian security forces, there will be bloodbath," Khan said, emphasizing that 8 million Kashmiris are "locked in as animals.”

"Do you think the Kashmiris will quietly accept status quo?" when their rights and special status are revoked, Khan asked Modi.

He warned the "ultra-nationalist agenda" of the Indian government threatens peace in the region, citing the death of Mahatma Gandhi at the hands of the same "ideology of hate."

Tension between the two South Asian nuclear neighbors mounted in recent weeks after the Indian government scrapped the special status of Jammu and Kashmir on Aug. 5.

Since then, the Indian government has blocked communication access and imposed restrictions on movement to thwart any protests in the region.

Several rights groups including Human Rights Watch and Amnesty International have repeatedly called on India to lift restrictions and release political detainees.

India said that 93% of the restrictions have been eased in the conflict-ridden region, a claim that Anadolu Agency could not independently verify.

India and Pakistan hold Kashmir in parts and claim it in full. China also controls part of the contested region, but it is India and Pakistan who have fought two wars over Kashmir.

The Pakistani premier said the Kashmir policy of India will radicalize Muslims across the world.

"Kashmiris, 180 million Muslims in India and 1.3 billion Muslims in the world will be radicalized," he said.

Khan urged the UN to live up to its resolutions and responsibilities on Kashmir and said that it is a "test for the UN" to restore its credibility by giving the right of self-determination to Kashmiris.

He also dedicated a significant part of his address to raise awareness about Islamophobia.

"No religion preaches terrorism," Khan said and warned against associating Islam with terrorism or extremism.

"The basis of all religions is compassion and justice which differentiates us from the animal kingdom."
