PMC Bank crisis: If bank stays shut, it will sink in six months, says Joy Thomas

Account-holders outside a PMC Bank branch yesterday (Photo by Satyajit Desai)

Sarang Wadhawan

Mumbai Metropolitan Region

PMC Bank’s suspended MD Joy Thomas speakswith Mumbai Mirror.In an exclusive interview with Mirror, Joy Thomas, the suspended managing director of Punjab and Maharashtra Cooperative (PMC) Bank admitted the board had made a mistake by hiding the extent of its non-performing assets (NPAs) but said that it wasn’t detected by the RBI. “The RBI didn’t detect this mistake; we went to them and asked for a solution to the problem. Instead, they shut us down. The RBI conducts inspections randomly and so it did not detect our wrong classification for so long. If the bank remains shut, it will sink in six months.” The Reserve Bank of India had on September 23 placed restrictions on PMC Bank Limited for six months under Section 35A of the Banking Regulation Act, 1949, citing massive under-reporting of non-performing assets (NPAs) by its auditors. It initially limited withdrawals to Rs 1,000 per account and later increased this to Rs 10,000.Advocate Rakesh Singh, representing the suspended board of Punjab and Maharashtra Cooperative (PMC) Bank, told Mumbai Mirror yesterday that the board would make a formal representation to the Reserve Bank of India (RBI) to allow the bank to function with restrictions as it has the resources to emerge from this mess. If the RBI didn’t respond to their request, they would approach a court, he added. He offered no time frame for this.Thomas said the pile-up of NPAs in the Housing and Development Infrastructure Ltd (HDIL) group’s accounts began in 2013-14, but all accounts were not NPAs; some were genuine accounts, which were serviced regularly. “The total NPAs in HDIL group accounts are around Rs 2,500 crore,” he said. Thomas added, “The RBI could have handled the matter in a compassionate way rather than just going by technicalities. We could have rectified the situation had we been given some time.”Defending the bank’s decision to give a personal loan of Rs 96.5 crore to, vicechairman and managing director of HDIL, in August, Thomas claimed, “Had we not given these funds, HDIL would have gone bankrupt and we wouldn’t have been able to recover all the loans we have given to the group, which includes around 30 companies.”He claimed that all the loans given to HDIL were fully secured. “As security against the loans given to HDIL group we have land and developed properties worth more than Rs 6,500 crore across the,” he said. Thomas also refuted allegations that the board members committed fraud to expand the bank’s business rapidly, and claimed they had chosen not to disclose the correct amount of NPAs “in the interest of depositors”.JB Bohria, the RBI administrator looking into the PMC Bank mess, had earlier refused to confirm whether the personal loan of Rs 96.5 crore to Wadhawan had been the trigger for initiating action against the bank.Meanwhile, more than 200 PMC Bank depositors planned to gather at Alam Park in Andheri East at 10am today to protest. After the RBI increased the withdrawal limit from Rs 1,000 to Rs 10,000 on Thursday, Friday saw long queues of depositors outside the bank’s 80-plus branches in Mumbai. However, the Oshiwara branch developed technical problem and many depositors had to return home empty-handed before they were called back after 4 pm.
