Morning digest: PM Modi says world respects India more now, Srinagar witnesses 23 street protests in a sudden spike, and more

A select list of stories to read before you start your day

Prime Minister Narendra Modi was greeted by the sights, sounds and dresses of a “Mini India” as part of a grand welcome ceremony organised by the State unit of the JP here on Saturday evening. Party workers in the thousands, mobilised from across the Capital and showcasing the cultural heritage of their respective States, began assembling at the Palam airport technical area hours in advance of his arrival.

In a strong rebuttal to Pakistan Prime Minister Imran Khan’s address to the United Nations General Assembly (UNGA), India said Mr. Khan had engaged in “hate speech”. “Unfortunately, what we heard today from Prime Minister Imran Khan of Pakistan was a callous portrayal of the world in binary terms, ‘us’ versus ‘them’, rich versus poor, North versus South, developed versus developing, Muslims versus others,” First Secretary in India’s Permanent Mission to the UN Vidisha Maitra said on Friday night. She was speaking during the minutes allocated to India for its right of reply.

Mohammad Younus Bhat is not impressed with the government’s offer to buy apples from farmers in Jammu and Kashmir at double the market rate. Mr. Bhat of Shopian in south Kashmir, the largest apple producing area in J&K, says he cannot betray his trade partners of several decades in Lucknow and Delhi. He fears the government’s offer can damage the age-old social and economic ties the Valley have with the rest of India.

The ruling BJP is likely to announce it first list of candidates for the Maharashtra Assembly election on Sunday, a party source said here. The Assembly election will be held in the State on October 21.

S. Mahendran (name changed) starts his day at 7.30 a.m. at one of the busiest government hospitals in Chennai. He spends the next 10-12 hours walking to beds of patients in the wards, checking their vital parameters, administering injections and drugs, carrying out routine investigations and coordinating visits of specialists. His working hours get extended if the condition of any of the patients deteriorates.

The police have recorded at least 15 late night protests and eight daytime incidents of stone pelting in the past 24 hours in Srinagar, indicating a sudden worsening of the law and order in the wake of Pakistan Prime Minister Imran Khan’s speech at the United Nations on Friday.

Eight Sikh prisoners, lodged in different jails in the country for committing crimes during the militancy in Punjab, will be released by the government as a goodwill gesture on the occasion of 550th birth anniversary of Guru Nanak Dev in November.

Meghalaya’s bid to exclude “unrepresented tribes” from the provisions of the Sixth Schedule of the Constitution has left minor tribes in the hill State edgy. Meghalaya is divided into autonomous councils in the names of the three major matrilineal communities — Garo, Khasi and Jaintia. The minority tribes include the Hajong, Koch, Rabha, Boro and Mann.

A Delhi court on Saturday asked American technology giant Apple Inc to furnish by October 9 details of former BJP MLA Kuldeep Singh Sengar’s location on the day he allegedly raped a 17-year-old girl from Unnao. District judge Dharmesh Sharma, holding in-chamber proceedings, gave the manufacturer of the iPhone time till October 9 after the technology firm sought two weeks to locate and access the requisite data, said lawyers related to the case.

The Delhi Police has filed a supplementary chargesheet against BJP MP Gautam Gambhir and others for allegedly cheating buyers of apartments in a building project in Ghaziabad’s Indirapuram.

Ahead of the Assembly byelection in Punjab, the infighting among Congress leaders has once again come to the fore with a Minister on Saturday accusing the party’s Rajya Sabha member Partap Singh Bajwa of deliberately “sabotaging the party’s chances”.
