Kolkata to implement single-use plastic ban from October 2, violators to pay Rs 500 fine

Along with Kolkata, the Delhi Metro is too considering a ban on single-use plastic on its premises. | Photo Credit: Getty Images

Key Highlights The Bidhannagar Municipal Corporation too is taking up similar measures. These non-biodegradable bags are not only a bane for the environment but also for municipal authorities The banned items include poly bags under 50 microns, PET bottles, plastic water pouches, straws, plates

Kolkata: In a bid to have a greener future and cleaner environment, the Kolkata Municipal Corporation (KMC) has decided to put a ban on single-use plastic from October 2. The Bidhannagar Municipal Corporation too is taking up similar measures.

After implementing the ban, the residents have to use their own bags just like the 1990s. While purchasing groceries, vegetables, fish or meat, citizens will have to carry their own bags. These non-biodegradable bags are not only a bane for the environment but also for municipal authorities, clogging gully pits, choking drains and triggering waterlogging in cities and mudslides on the hills.

The banned items include poly bags under 50 microns, PET bottles under 200 ml capacity, plastic water pouches, straws, plates, bowls, glasses, single-use cutlery as well. According to a report the ban in Kolkata coincides with a nationwide clampdown on single-use plastic that will be implemented on Gandhi Jayanti.

The Ministry of Environment, Forest and Climate Change claimed that 20,000 tonnes of plastic waste is generated out which only 13,000-14,000 tonnes are collected. A KMC market department official told media that the authorities have been informed about disposing of their single-use plastic items by October 1. From October 2, sale and purchase of single-use plastics like polybags, plastic straws and polystyrene products like plates, bowls, glasses will not be allowed in KMC area. For non-compliance of the rules, the violators will be fined for Rs 500.

Along with Kolkata, the Delhi Metro is too considering a ban on single-use plastic on its premises. In line with Prime Minister Narendra Modi's vision, civic bodies and various institutions have initiated campaigns to shun single-use plastic usage.

Delhi Metro Rail Corporation (DMRC), Anuj Dayal told media that taking into consideration all these aspects, the DMRC will be framing and issuing necessary guidelines for compliance by all its stakeholders in the next few days. Reportedly, some of the vendors at stations have already voluntarily started keeping paper bags to hand out to customers after the purchase of any item.
