Rajnath Singh witnesses fire power of Western Fleet on-board INS Vikramaditya

Rajntah Singh onboard the aircraft carrier INS Vikramaditya which is currently sailing along India's western coastline | Photo courtesy: Manjeet Negi

Defence Minister Rajnath Singh said that the India Navy always ready to defend the country from all threats. Addressing the personnel of Western Fleet on-board INS Vikramaditya off the coast of Goa, Rajnath Singh said he's impressed to see the commitment of Indian Navy sailors.

After witnessing the prowess and fire power of the Western Fleet first-hand, Rajnath Singh said, "I am most impressed to see the professionalism, commitment and spirited approach shown by the brave sailors of the Indian Navy. I am reassured that the security of our nation is in safe hands."

RAJNATH SINGH LAUDS MULTI-DIMENSIONAL APPROACH ADOPTED BY INDIAN NAVY

Emphasising that security of India relies a lot on being strong in the sea, Rajnath Singh lauded the multi-dimensional approach adopted by the Indian Navy to ensure safety and security in the country's areas of maritime interest.

Rajnath Singh said that the Navy's mission-based deployments at critical regions of the Indian Ocean have strengthened the maritime security environment in the region.

RAJNATH SINGH COMMENDS WESTERN FLEET

Rajnath Singh also commended the Western Fleet which was immediately deployed in a strong posture in the northern Arabian Sea when the government effectively responded to the Pulwama attacks through strikes on terror camps in Balakot.

Rajnath Singh said, "The Western Fleet degraded the ability of our adversary and ensured they did not attempt any misadventure in the sea."

INDIAN NAVY, A CREDIBLE DETERRENT: RAJNATH SINGH

Rajnath Singh said Indian Navy plays the most significant role to have a credible "second strike" capability as a nuclear deterrent.

Saying that Indian naval ships are continuously deployed for anti-piracy operations, Rajnath Singh commended the Navy for demonstrating and re-affirming its role as a net security provider in the Indian Ocean region.

Rajnath Singh said that the Navy has been able to achieve credible deterrence by maintaining a very high degree of preparedness through regular training, quality maintenance and strategic situational awareness. Rajnath Singh also termed naval deployments as an important tool of diplomacy which is essential to build bonds with friendly nations.

Describing Navy as the key enabler and guarantor of the India's maritime security, Rajnath Singh said, "India's economic resurgence is directly linked to its overseas trade and energy needs, most of which is by sea. About 90 per cent of India's international trade by volume and about 70 per cent by value are carried by sea. As we move towards our goal of $5 trillion economy, the volume of maritime trade will only grow in times to come. Thus, I firmly believe that the role of the Indian Navy in general and the Western Fleet in particular is also critical in ensuring the energy security and economic growth of the country."

STRONG AND MODERN NAVY

Rajnath Singh said, "The government's commitment towards building a strong and modern Navy was evident in the time of Atal ji when strong policy decisions to increase funding for warship construction were taken in order to build 'blue water' capability for the Navy."

Rajnath Singh lauded the multi-dimensional approach adopted by the Navy | Photo courtesy: Manjeet Negi

Rajnath Singh suggested a push for a 'blue water' Navy considering the increasing prestige and economic power of the country.

Listing out the measures implemented by the government in this direction, Rajnath Singh said, "Induction and integration of new state-of-the-art equipment through the prime minister's 'Make in India' initiative is making the Indian Navy amongst the most advanced navies of the world today."

"Our indigenously built destroyers, frigates, submarines, patrol vessels and attack craft are a testimony of the industrial strength of the country and the role of the Navy towards empowering domestic technologies and industries is noteworthy," Rajnath Singh added.

SELF-RELIANT INDIA: RAJNATH SINGH

On commissioning INS Khanderi, the second indigenously built Scorpene-class submarine, launching 'Nilgiri', the first of the indigenous Project 17A frigates and commissioning the Aircraft Carrier Dock at Naval Dockyard, Rajnath Singh said, "This is an indication of a self-reliant India and generates confidence about our maritime power and the bright future of the country."

RAJNATH SINGH SALUTES COMMITMENT OF SIACHEN WARRIORS

Recalling his visit to the world's highest battlefield at Siachen at the start of his term as defence minister, Rajnath Singh saluted the commitment of the Siachen Warriors to prevail in extreme harsh weather and highly treacherous terrain for maintaining the sanctity of Indian borders and ensuring utmost safety of fellow countrymen.

RAJNATH SINGH'S FLIGHT IN TEJAS

Rajnath Singh also said that his experience of flying the fourth-generation aircraft Tejas made him appreciate the professionalism, courage and bravery of the pilots of Indian Air Force (IAF) even more.

RAJNATH SINGH ON INS VIKRAMADITYA

During his stay on INS Vikramaditya, the biggest ship of Indian Navy, Rajnath Singh witnessed a wide range of naval operations including weapon firing by the fighter aircraft and night flying operations by helicopter from the deck of the aircraft carrier.

In addition, surface shoots, missile and rocket firing by various ships underway replenishment with multiple ships and submarines operations were also demonstrated.

Rajnath Singh witnessed operations at sea which included simultaneous underway replenishment of multiple warships by the tanker, ensuring prolonged sustenance at sea.

Rajnath Singh joined the ship's crew during morning yoga followed by a walk around the aircraft carrier. Rajnath Singh was also briefed on the reach of Indian Navy and enhanced Maritime Domain Awareness.

Rajnath Singh joined the ship's crew during morning yoga | Photo courtesy: Manjeet Negi

Rajnath Singh also spoke to INS Mysore, deployed in the Strait of Hormuz, through video conferencing. Rajnath Singh also interacted with the crew of INS Vikramaditya over Barakhana.

The visit culminated with the steam past and fly past - the traditional naval salutation by ships, submarines and aircraft of Western Naval Command.

Rajnath Singh was accompanied by the Chief of the Naval Staff Admiral Karambir Singh, Flag Offcer Commanding-in-Chief Western Naval Command Vice-Admiral Ajith Kumar and Rear Admiral Jasjit Singh Flag Officer Commanding Western Fleet.
