Three of gang involved in recent south Delhi snatching cases held

Manhunt for other members of the gang is under way, say police

Three members of a gang involved in recent incidents of snatching in south Delhi have been arrested, the police said on Sunday. Manhunt for the other members of the gang is on, they said.

Two of the arrested accused, they said, had come out on bail in Uttar Pradesh and moved to Delhi.

Atul Thakur, DCP (South), said that the police were working on a snatching case in which a Brazilian national was targeted a few days back in GK II.

The arrested accused have been identified as Munnawar, Vijay and Honey, he said.

Mr. Thakur added that Munnawar, who belongs to UP’s Aligarh, is involved in more than 20 cases of snatching and robbery in Aligarh. “He was arrested by the U.P. Police in December 2017. After being released from jail in April 2019, he waited for his accomplice Honey to come out of jail. Honey was released in June this year,” said Mr. Thakur.

Honey and Munnawar then robbed a person of a bike in Aligarh. They got a random registration number of Delhi written on the number plate and drove from Aligarh to Delhi, the police said.

Munnawar then used the same bike in two other incidents of snatching.

The police said that their co-accused, Vijay, who also hails from Aligarh, is Munnawar’s childhood friend. He used to work as a laboratory assistant in Ghaziabad. After he quit his job, he had come to Delhi in search of a job and was staying at Munnawar’s house.

Munawar and Vijay hatched a plan and targeted the Brazilian woman in GK-II recently. They snatched the woman’s bag containing $355, a mobile phone, ATM cards and her passport. After they failed to switch off the phone, they dumped it in Jasola to avoid getting caught. The phone was, however, later recovered by the police with the help of location tracking.

“Acting on a tip-off and technical surveillance, we have arrested the men and recovered all the robbed articles from their possession. We have also found a pistol and live bullets from their house,” said Mr. Thakur.

A senior police officer said that members of the same gang targeted a woman journalist in CR Park recently. The victim suffered injuries on her face and hand in the incident.

“We are close to arresting the other members of the gang. Munawar was the kingpin and he used to bring men from Aligarh to commit snatching in Delhi and would return to Aligarh to avoid getting caught after each incident,” said Mr. Thakur.
