Maharashtra Assembly polls: Rift rife between Congress, NCP over seat-sharing

Serious differences have come to the fore between Congress and Nationalist Congress Party (NCP) to arrive at a consensus on the seat sharing arrangement for the Maharashtra Legislative Assembly election. Of the 288 seats, Congress has staked its claim over 145 seats leaving 125 seats to NCP and the balance 18 to other like minded and secular parties. NCP has taken a strong objection to Congress party's ''rigid'' stand saying that there is no unanimity yet between the two parties.

However, both the parties on Sunday indicated with the intervention of high commands of respective parties they will be able to sort out differences to stitch the alliance.

Maharashtra Pradesh Congress Committee President Balasaheb Thorat told DNA, "Congress will contest 145 seats of which the party will give few seats to allies while NCP to contest 125 seats.The balance 18 will go to allies including Peasants and Workers Party, Samajwadi Party, Communist Party (M), Swabhimani Shetkari Sanghatana (SSS), Bahujan Vikas Aghadi, Republican Party of India (Kawade) and Bahujan Samaj.'' He informed the announcement for alliance will be possible after yet another round of negotiations slated for October 2. However, the NCP state unit chief Jayant Patil said there has been no consensus yet. He declined to divulge further details.

The stand off between Congress and the NCP is despite repeated announcements by the NCP President Sharad Pawar and the former chief minister Prithviraj Chavan that Congress and NCP will contest 125 seats each leaving 38 to other like minded and secular parties. In Mumbai of the 36 seats, Congress will fight 29 and 7 by NCP. Both will provide to other allies from their respective quota.

Another NCP leader, who is engaged in negotiations with Congress, said the Congress party is not prepared to leave its ''rigid'' stand. ''Congress is not ready to leave a single seat in Nagpur, Chandrapur and Nandurbar districts to NCP. There are about 8 to 10 seats on which Congress and NCP still differ,'' he noted.

However, Thorat brushes aside NCP's argument. He said "The NCP admits that the Congress will have an upper hand. Going by the number of candidates and capacity to put up a challenge, the Congress is of the opinion of contesting more seats than earlier formula of 125 seats each. It will take some time to work out an acceptable formula.''

The state goes to polls on October 21 and counting of votes will be on October 24.
