Bihar Rains Latest Updates: Death Toll Rises To 29; Patna To Receive More Rainfall, Says IMD

The state government has requested the Indian Air Force (IAF) for two helicopters for lifting and airdropping food packets and medicines, in the flood-affected areas of the region. Also Watch | Heavy rains hit life in Bihar; Patna water-logged Here are ten points on this big story: 1) The death toll due to incessant rainfall and flood in different areas of the state has risen to 29, officials said on Monday. According to the Bihar State Disaster Management Authority, till now, 29 people have died in the state due to rainfall. 2) In hard-hit Bihar, a bird's eye view of state capital Patna made the city appear like a huge lake dotted with concrete structures. Posh low-lying areas like Rajendra Nagar and Pataliputra Colony are flooded. 3) While people waded through the waterlogged streets, boats of Nation Disaster Response Force (NDRF) were also out in some areas of the city rescuing residents. 4) The flood water has also entered houses and shops at many places in the state, apart from Patna. Private hospitals, medical stores and other shops have submerged in waist-deep water. 5) The rains also affected the movement of trains, road traffic as well as flight operations. Twelve long route trains and several passenger trains have been cancelled. There were reports of damage to the National Highways at several places in north Bihar districts. Also Watch | Post downpour, Patna schools to remain shut till Tuesday 6) The Centre has already deployed teams of National Disaster Response Force and State Disaster Response Force for rescue and relief operations in vulnerable places. 7) As many as 19 teams of NDRF have been deployed in Bihar, where normal life has been affected due to incessant rainfall. NDRF teams are carrying out rescue and evacuation operations along with other agencies in the flood-affected areas. So far, NDRF has rescued two people and evacuated 4945 people and 45 livestock. 8) Chief Minister Nitish Kumar on Sunday afternoon visited the severely flooded areas of the state capital and issued necessary instructions to the officials for resolving the issue. 9) Congress interim President Sonia Gandhi on Sunday expressed grave concern over the flood situation and drew the attention of the Central government to provide required assistance to the state governments. Expressing deep concern over the flood situation arising out of incessant rains in Bihar, especially Patna, Uttar Pradesh and other states, Sonia Gandhi in a statement said that she was hoping that the state governments and local administration were taking sufficient relief and remedial measures. 10) The Indian Meteorological Department (IMD) has issued a red alert for Bihar on Sunday. IMD Patna chapter also predicted heavy rains to extremely heavy rainfall in at least nine districts in the state. (with inputs from agencies)

Battered by heavy rainfall for the forth consecutive day, Bihar lost at least 29 lives on Monday to mishaps caused by the downpour that inundated streets, water-logged railway tracks and marooned business establishments. Heavy downpour has crippled life, especially in the state capital where record rains caused heavy water-logging and did not spare the houses of the Deputy Chief Minister and two former Chief Ministers. Patna is now facing a flood-like situation with water is all around. People have been forced to stay indoors as most of the roads were water-logged. According to the India Meteorological Department, Patna will receive more rainfall for the next few days accompanied by thunderstorms.
