PHOTOS: Red alert in Bihar as rivers continue to rise

Heavy waterlogging at Langartoli road lead to Sabzibagh in Patna on Sunday during heavy continuos rainfall.

Heavy

on Langartoli Road leading to Sabzibagh in Patna

A flooded street at Sri Krishnapuri in Patna

A view of swollen Ganga from Gol Ghar in Patna

Rain water enters Nalanda Medical College and Hospital (NMCH) in Patna

Locals using private boats at Rajendra Nagar in Patna

Waterlogging near Patna's Gandhi Maidan

A flooded village in Darbhanga

Rajendra Nagar in Patna

An ambulance of a private hospital in Rajendra Nagar stuck in floods

Passengers rush to find status of their trains in Patna

Flooded tracks led to disruption in train services

Schools to remain closed till Tuesday

Bihar CM Nitish Kumar blames nature for lack of preparedness for floods

PATNA: There is no respite in sight as the India Meteorological Department (IMD) retained its “red colour” warning with forecast of heavy to very heavy rainfall in Bihar on Monday.The red colour warning stipulates that authorities concerned should take preventive action to minimize loss of property and lives.At least 29 people died in different parts of the state as heavy rain continued to wreak havoc in Patna and most districts of Bihar on Sunday.Four persons were crushed to death after a branch of a huge tree fell on an autorickshaw in Khagaul locality in Patna while six persons died in wall collapse incidents at separate places in Gaya district.Eight deaths were reported from Bhagalpur while three persons were feared drowned in Nawada. A six-year-old girl died after wall collapse in Begusarai district.Ganga, Sone, Punpun, Ghagra and Burhi Gandak rivers mantained a rising trend at few places in the state. IMD stated that heavy to heavy rainfall is expected at isolated places in the state over the next 24 hours.It stated that southwest monsoon was vigorous over Bihar and extremely heavy rainfall (more than 204mm) occurred at Rosera (290mm) in Samastipur district and Bihpur (208mm) in Bhagalpur besides at Koilwar (205mm) in Bhojpur on Sunday. Patna received 227.3mm rainfall from 8:30am on Saturday till 5:30pm on Sunday.Chief minister Nitish Kumar held another high-level review meeting on Sunday to take stock of the situation. Disaster management department’s principal secretary Pratyaya Amrit briefed the CM about the prevailing scenario and the rescue and relief operations in the state.Nitish attributed the ongoing heavy showers to climate change. He also claimed that meteorologists were also unable to say clearly when the rain will stop. “However, I think rain will continue for at least two to three days,” Nitish said after the meeting. However, Patna Met office claimed that rainfall is likely to start reducing in intensity from Monday afternoon.The CM also said the situation may aggravate if the water level rises in Punpun river situated south of Patna. “However, it can’t be said whether such a situation will actually happen. Nonetheless, we are prepared for all eventualities,” Nitish said.Three more teams of NDRF were deployed in Patna where Rajendra Nagar, Kadamkuan, Kankarbagh and Patna City areas remained waterlogged.Train and flight operations were also affected due to incessant downpour. At least 13 long-distance and equal number of passenger trains were cancelled and the routes of 20 others were diverted in Danapur division. Two Patna-bound flights were diverted to Lucknow and Varanasi as the runway here was not visible to the pilots, airport officials said.Residents also remained indoors in the city. Anuradha Kumari of PC Colony at Kankarbagh said she, along with her two small kids had been stuck at home for the past two days. “We tried to contact the control room provided by district authorities but no one came for help. It is impossible for me to wade through 5-foot deep water. We have shifted to the top floor with essential items,” she told TOI on Sunday. “We have little stock of food and drinking water. There is no electricity. We are saving inverter battery just to charge our mobile phones and portable chargers,” she said.Patna DM Kumar Ravi on Sunday ordered closure of all private and government schools till Tuesday. Chief justice Amreshwar Pratap Sahi urged other judges to accommodate the cases scheduled for hearing on September 30 and October 1 in case the lawyers are not able to turn up due to ongoing heavy rain.
