It is jihad, want Allah to be happy with us: Back from UNGA, Imran Khan issues another threat over Kashmir

At UNGA, Imran Khan threatened of nuclear war over Kashmir | Photo Credit: AP

Key Highlights In his UNGA speech, Imran Khan blamed India for its actions in Kashmir He threatened of 'attacks in India' and forewarned the world that New Delhi will blame Pakistan for any terror attacks on its soil

Islamabad: Pakistan Prime Minister Imran Khan on Sunday said that those supporting Kashmiris were doing 'jihad'. On return from the US where he 'forcefully' raised the Kashmir matter and overshot his allotted time limit of 15 minutes while threatening the world of a nuclear war over Kashmir, Khan said that Pakistan will support Kashmiris even if the world did not.

"It (standing by Kashmiris) is jihad. We are doing it because we want Allah to be happy with us," Khan told his party workers after they received him at the airport.

"It is a struggle and (therefore) do not lose heart when the time is not good. Do not be disappointed as the Kashmiris are looking towards you," he said, adding, "Kashmiris would win if the Pakistani people stood by their side."

In his speech at the United Nations General Assembly (UNGA), Khan spoke for over 50 minutes — far beyond the stipulated time period of 15 minutes — and blamed the western world for 'Islamophobia'. Blaming India for the 'curfew' in Kashmir, Khan issued vehement threats of jihad, nuclear and conventional war over Kashmir.

Warning the world of terror attacks in India, Khan said that 'like Pulwama', ' New Delhi will blame Pakistan' for any future attack in India. Khan's speech, which came shortly after Prime Minister Narendra Modi, was in stark contrast to his Indian counterpart who focus on global issues such as climate change, energy security, and peace and harmony.

PM Modi said that India has "given the world, not war, but Buddha's message of peace." Ever since New Delhi's decision to revoke the special status of Jammu and Kashmir, Pakistan has been trying to internationalise the Kashmir issue. In return, however, Islamabad has been given a muted response, not only by global platforms but even by its allies including China.

India had responded to Pakistan Prime Minister Imran Khan’s speech at the UN. Vidisha Maitra, First Secretary MEA responded to Imran Khan’s vitriolic threatening speech at the UN which was full of threats of nuclear war and had in a way shamed Pakistan before the international community. First Secretary MEA, said, " PM Imran Khan's threat of unleashing nuclear devastation qualifies as brinksmanship, not statesmanship."
