We will be ready to face any challenge, Air Chief Marshal RKS Bhadauria says after taking over as Air Chief

Air chief Marshal RKS Bhadauria | Photo Credit: ANI

Key Highlights Earlier, Army Chief General Bipin Rawat had said that Pakistan's understanding of strategic weapons was inappropriate Bhadauria also said that Rafale will give India an edge over Pakistan and China

New Delhi: Air Chief Marshal RKS Bhadauria, on Monday, said that the Indian Air Force (IAF) is ready for a Balakot-like strike in future. Talking to reporters after taking over as the Chief of Air Staff from outgoing chief Air Chief Marshal BS Dhanoa, Bhadauria said that the IAF was 'prepared then' and will be prepared in future to conduct a Balakot-like strike.

"We were prepared then, we will be prepared next time. We will be ready to face any challenge, any threat," Bhadauria said.

"We are aware of the reports and we will take the necessary action, as and when required," he further added. Bhadauria takes over at a time when Pakistan PM Imran Khan has issued vehement threats of nuclear war over Kashmir.

While Khan issued repeated threats of a possible nuclear flash during his extended speech at the United Nations General Assembly (UNGA) last week, the language continued even after landing in Pakistan, where he claimed that supporting Kashmiris was 'jihad'.

Commenting on Pakistan's repeated reference to strategic weapons, Bhadauria said — "That is their understanding of nuclear aspects. We have our own understanding, our own analysis. We will be ready to face any challenge."

Earlier today, Army Chief General Bipin Rawat had also said that Pakistan lacked the understanding about strategic weapons as they were meant to act as mere deterrents.

Bhadauria, who has also played a key role in the acquisition of Rafale fighter jets, earlier said that Rafale is a very capable aircraft and it will be a game-changer in our operational capability. "It will give India an edge over Pakistan and China," Bhadauria said.
