Major gambling racket busted in Kolkata; popular biryani joint owner in the ambit too

Owner of popular biryani chain in Kolkata detained for gambling. | Photo Credit: Representative Image

Key Highlights Kolkata police raid gambling racket at two places Owner of popular biryani chain in Kolkata detained for gambling

Kolkata: In a major crackdown against gambling in the city, the anti-rowdy unit of the Kolkata police have busted a gambling racket by detaining several people including the owner of a popular biryani joint in the city.

The arrest came following raids at multiple locations in Park Street and Shakespeare Sarani area on Saturday (September 29) evening.

According to a report, the owner of Arsalan Biryani chain, Akhtar Parwez, was caught red-handed while gambling. Police said the detained accused may be arrested once found guilty.

According to Joint Commissioner of Police (crime), Murlidhar Sharma, police conducted several raids at two places in the city and detained many persons including Akhtar Parwez. The accused were questioned by police till late into the night.

The police raids came following a specific tip-off about the gambling racket in two areas. The police raided the places and found the accused playing poker.

Some of the people managed to flee the spot following the raids. According to police, the accused could be booked under West Bengal Gambling and Prize Competitions Act 1957 if found guilty of gambling during the investigations. There is a ban on gambling in many states including West Bengal.

Off late, the Arsalan family had been in the news for all the wrong reasons including a hit and run case in the city in which two Bangladeshi nationals were killed.

On August 21, the homicide department of the Kolkata police claimed that it was Raghib Parwez, the elder son of biryani chain owner, who was involved in the deadly car crash that claimed two lives. Previous media reports had suggested that Akhtar Parwez's younger son Arsalan Parwez was involved in the accident.

Police identified Raghib Parwez as the main accused in the car crash case, which killed two Bangladeshi citizens on August 17 at the Shakespeare Sarani-Loudon Street crossing. Police later arrested Raghib from Baenipukur.

The Jaguar, which was allegedly driven by Raghib, rammed into a Mercedes which crashed into a police kiosk after the impact. Two Bangladeshis were killed in the incident when the police kiosk hit by Mercedes fell on them. A third Bangladeshi national was injured in the incident.
