Learning about the world in Hyderabad

Sahar Zaman has been on the arts beat long enough to know that arts and artists often boggle people's minds. She sees herself as a translator of the creative works in music, design, theater and visual arts. For the past 20 years, she has worked with the motto of making arts accessible. This she has done through her journalism and reportage in TV, print, radio and online. Her experience in political newscasting helps in ensuring that the arts is viewed through the spectrum of mainstream news. LESS ... MORE

After spending a day at the multi-storey State Art Gallery of Hyderabad, I learnt about a new law that Argentina is working on to protect the rights and guaranteed health insurance of Albinos in their country. I found out how mass food production across the world is similar in terms of the large-scale and an ever growing global demand. I realized how the children of Burkina Faso have braved poverty and terrorism each single day to get themselves to school shacks for a basic education. Or how the stunning animal portraits of elephants and rhinoceros is actually a wake-up call that even these are now listed as Endangered Species. I witnessed the shocking similarity with which every refugee undergoes. The same escape, the same trial, the same battle for survival; be it off the coast of Libya or Greece or Morocco or Spain. I was enriched with all these global human stories in a stunning pictorial display at the Indian Photo Festival, presented by the National Geographic.

“Since it’s an international festival, we take global issues but they connect with any kind of audience. Primarily we wanted to create a platform for conversation because photography has been a great educator all these years. We started with just 15 countries participating and today with the 5th edition, we have around 60 countries on board,” says Aquin Mathew, Director or Indian Photo Festival.

This has been an annual festival in Hyderabad for the past 5 years. With an unquestionable rigour in content supported by an equally stunning series of photo works, I can comfortably put this out as one of the best photo festivals that you will get to see in India.

“This year, having the National Geographic on board is a great validation of the work our team does because they have their own quality checks and this is the first of its kind partnership in India for them. There’s been a lot of synergy in the way we both support photographers for telling stories on difficult issues and providing them grants. That approach worked for both of us to come together,” adds Mathew.

American photographer George Steinmetz is currently in Kochi to study the large coffee plantations with rising global consumption. His global series on food production is an eye-opener. “The global population is expected to increase to 9.8 billion by 2050. We will have to double the global food supply. How can we do that without wiping out the few wild places we have left? Food production is an environmental issue.”

Much of his work focuses on agriculture in industrialized countries. He demands more transparency in our food production system. Artistically, he also finds it a visual spectacle, as seen from above, using his specially customized paraglider. The bird’s eye view makes a fish farm in China look like a pack of blue cards. And multiple rows of cowsheds in America seem like organized Lego blocks.

Argentinian photographer Jorge Monaco has dedicated one complete series of portraits to Albinism. It’s a genetic condition not spoken about often. Since it’s not a life-threatening condition, it hardly makes it to headline-grabbing campaigns. But far more sinister than the health condition itself is the societal prejudice that Albinos need to deal with all through their life. They are stared upon, they are discouraged from being seen and often develop an under confidence to face people.

“In Argentina, a national law is being discussed to protect rights, guarantee access to public health services and avoid discrimination against Albinos.”

His portraits force you to reconsider your own prejudice, look at Albinism with the empathy it needs. Each of these faces which are bathed in white and silver with melancholic expressions are strongly individualistic in their fight to equality.

Spanish photographer Antonio Aragon Renuncio takes us to Burkino Faso. He describes it as a country permanently anchored at the top of the world’s poverty list and is also now under continuous terror attacks. The Islamist threat to modern education has caused schools to shut down with 1,50,000 children affected.

“They don’t go to school anymore. Improvised blackboards fill their humble dwellings. The older ones teach the younger ones. Education generates trust. Trust generates hope. Hope generates peace.”

Closer to home are the works of anthropologist Dr. Michael Yorke during his trip to India in the 1970s. While researching the tribal life of the Ho in Jharkhand and the Raj Gond in Telangana, he chose to live with them for two years each to gain their trust.

His pictorial documentation is a priceless treasure for us to help understand our own people, since some of these areas in Jharkhand are inaccessible due to the Naxalite threat. It shows us the cycle of Ho adivasi rituals from birth to death before modern culture and politics permanently changed their lives.

The Telengana Department of Tribal Welfare is helping the Raj Gonds revisit their lost culture through the public display of Dr Yorke’s work to revive their sense of identity.

And that becomes the true journey of photography. A pictorial documentation of a moment in time. Each photographer plays the crucial role of being the storyteller for what we were before today.

Facebook Twitter Linkedin Email Disclaimer Views expressed above are the author's own.
