Two civilians martyred, three injured in Indian cross-border firing

-

ISLAMABAD, Pakistan: Two civilians including a woman and a young boy embraced martyrdom while two more women among three persons sustained injuries as a result of unprovoked firing by the Indian forces along the Line of Control (LoC) on September 28-29, 2019, the Foreign Office said on Monday.

In a statement, the Foreign Office said that firing incidents took place in Nikial and Rakhchikri Sectors along the LoC.

The Foreign Office said that a 60-year-old lady Salamat Bibi and a 13-year-old young boy Zeeshan Ayub embraced Shahadat (martyrdom) due to indiscriminate and unprovoked firing by Indian army in both Sectors.

Additionally, one woman in Nikial Sector and two civilians including a woman in Rakhchikri Sector were seriously injured.

Meanwhile, the Director General (SA & SAARC) Dr Mohammad Faisal summoned the Indian Deputy High Commissioner Gaurav Ahluwalia today (Monday) and condemned the unprovoked ceasefire violations by the Indian occupation forces.

The director general (SA & SAARC) urged the Indian side to respect the 2003 ceasefire arrangement; investigate these and other incidents of ceasefire violations; instruct the Indian forces to respect the ceasefire, in letter and spirit and maintain peace on the LoC and the Working Boundary.

Dr Faisal urged that the Indian side should permit the United Nations Military Observers group in India and Pakistan (UNMOGIP) to play its mandated role as per the UN Security Council resolutions.

The Foreign Office said that the Indian occupation forces along the LoC and Working boundary have continuously been targeting civilian populated areas with artillery fire, heavy-caliber mortars, and automatic weapons, which still continues. This unprecedented escalation in ceasefire violations by India is continuing from the year 2017 when the Indian forces committed 1970 ceasefire violations.

It said that the deliberate targeting of civilian populated areas is indeed deplorable and contrary to human dignity, international human rights and humanitarian laws. It further said that the ceasefire violations by India are a threat to regional peace and security and may lead to a strategic miscalculation.
