Brand new home for Chester Zoo lions to open in October

CHESTER Zoo's latest habitat promises to be the mane attraction for visitors when it opens in October.

The major new 4,780sq m habitat will be home to a trio of endangered Asiatic lions, male Iblis (aged 12) and females Kumari (12) and Kiburi (12).

The state-of-the-art new conservation breeding facility has been specially designed by expert carnivore keepers, conservationists and architects and recreates the dry forest and savannah habitats of the Gir Forest region of India, home to the last surviving wild population of Asiatic lions.

It will boast a densely planted forest, raised hilltop viewing points for the lions to survey their savannah, heated rocks, a water hole and a sandy beach area.

It will mean a change of scenery for the zoo's lions, as the lions have spent several decades in their current habitat close to what is now The Oakfield restaurant and pub.

They will be relocated to their brand new tailor-made home not far from the giraffe enclosure.

Asiatic lions, one of the rarest of all the big cat species, have suffered a huge decline in their natural range. They once roamed across Northern Africa, Greece, Turkey and Asia but now just 650 wild Asiatic lions remain in one small region of India.

Mike Jordan, animal and plant collections director at Chester Zoo, said: “The zoo’s new Asiatic lion habitat is modelled on the Gir Forest in Gujarat, India, the only place in the world where these highly endangered lions are now found.

“This remaining wild population is incredibly fragile and coexist with the local livestock herders of the region. If disease hits or a natural disaster occurs then the species could easily become extinct. It’s therefore extremely important that we continue to try and further our efforts as part of the international endangered species breeding programme that is working to boost Asiatic lion numbers.

“Asiatic lions have gone somewhat under the radar of conservation. But, with just 650 surviving in the wild, we must raise some much needed awareness of this beautiful, iconic species and inspire people to help us to prevent their extinction.”

The Asiatic lion has suffered dramatic decline in recent decades as a result of poaching, habitat fragmentation and disease, but is slowly increasing and spreading in its natural environment. The International Union for the Conservation of Nature (IUCN) classes the species as endangered – meaning it is still faced with a high chance of extinction.

Tim Rowlands, curator of mammals at Chester Zoo, added: “Readying a group of lions to move home can be challenging and, over several months, our expert carnivore keepers have been encouraging the lions into specially designed moving crates using their favourite food.

"Slowly, day by day, the lions have become more and more comfortable spending time inside the crates.

“When the finishing touches have been made to their spectacular new habitat our trio Iblis, Kumari and Kiburi will make the short journey across the zoo ready to explore their new home.”

Asiatic lions are generally shorter and smaller than their African cousins and can be identified because of their shaggier coat and the longer tassel on the end of their tails. They’re so rare that not everyone realises they even exist. It’s a common mistake to assume lions are only found in Africa.

The new habitat at Chester Zoo is due to open to visitors in October.
