Mumbai: Woman throws 2-year-old granddaughter from sixth-floor to teach daughter-in-law a lesson

A 50-year-old woman was arrested by Mumbai Police on Sunday for killing her two-year-old granddaughter in Malad, Mumbai. The accused allegedly threw off her granddaughter while she was asleep from the sixth-floor of a building in Kurar area.

The accused has been identified as Ruksana Obedulla Ansari.

On Saturday morning, residents in the Appa Pada locality woke up to the screams of the parents of a two-year-old who was found dead in the premises of the same building she stayed in.

The minor's body was found by locals who informed her family staying on the sixth floor of the SRA building. Her parents ran downstairs and found their baby girl lying lifeless in a pool of blood with her head smashed to the ground.

Initially, it was suspected that the minor might have accidentally fallen off the window while the family members were asleep but some inconsistencies at the crime scene raised suspicion.

Police officials found that the minor girl had fallen to the ground where her flat's window was located and it was shut when the body was found. Officials also found that the main door of the house was shut in the morning.

Dilip Sawant, Additional Commissioner of Police for the North Region of Mumbai, asked Kurar police station officials to conduct a detailed probe into the incident and question as many people possible including the family members.

"The initial questioning of the family members did not yield any results so some of them were questioned again and this time the victim's grandmother, who was her father's step-mother, changed her statement," a senior police official said.

"The grandmother -- who was later found to be accused -- kept changing her statement and wanted to avoid questions which raised suspicion," the police official said.

"Ruksana Obedulla Ansari was again grilled and she later revealed that she had thrown the kid as she had a fight with her daughter-in-law -- the victim's mother," the police official said.

The police said that Ruksana would often fight with the victim's mother. She wanted to teach her daughter-in-law a "lesson" so she threw her kid from the sixth-floor of the building.

"Ruksana would regularly get into fights with her daughter-in-law and to teach her a lesson, she threw off her granddaughter while the victim's mother and other family members were asleep on Saturday morning and went back to sleep again," th epolice said.

Police said the minor was asleep when she was thrown out of the window and she died of multiple head injuries due to impact.

Ruksana has been taken into custody and has been booked for murder.




