Give Bilkis Bano recompense, job and home in 2 weeks: Supreme Court to Gujarat govt

The Supreme Court on Monday set a two-week deadline for the Gujarat government to disburse a compensation of Rs 50 lakh, provide a government job and accommodation to Bilkis Bano, who was gang-raped during the 2002 Gujarat riots.



The court found no reason why the state should further delay executing an April 23 court order directing as much.



After almost five months elapsed since the apex court passed its order, the gang rape survivor Bilkis Yakub Rasool filed a contempt petition in the top court that came up for hearing before a bench of Chief Justice Ranjan Gogoi, Justices SA Bobde and S Abdul Nazeer.



At the first look of the petition, the bench asked the state government, "Why have you not paid the amount?"



Solicitor General Tushar Mehta, representing the state, informed the bench that the state intended to file a review challenging the SC order of April 2019. He apprehended that this order could be misused by similar rape victims in the state.



But the bench was firm that all its directions must be complied with at the earliest. It sought an undertaking from the state in this regard. Mehta said the state would need four weeks to provide the job and accommodation. The bench recorded the undertaking but set the deadline at two weeks. According to the judges, even this time won't be required to comply with its directions.



Bilkis was raped and left to die by 11 men during the 2002 Godhra riots. Following the incident, the Bombay High Court found five policemen and two doctors guilty of tampering evidence to shield the accused. The accused policemen included an Indian Police Service (IPS) officer RS Bhagora.



Advocate Shobha who represented the victim had sought an exemplary compensation as she was just 20 years at the time of incident with nobody to take care since all seven family members were killed by the accused. The trial in the case was conducted in a special court in Mumbai that convicted 11 persons for the crime and sentenced them to life. Seven persons (policemen and doctors) who were acquitted were later convicted by the HC.

Riot Horror Bilkis was raped and left to die by eleven men during 2002 Godhra riots

The Bombay HC later found five policemen and two doctors guilty of tampering evidence to shield the accused
