Ex-Karnataka CMs attack BS Yediyurappa over lack of flood relief from Centre

Ex-Karnataka CMs attack BS Yediyurappa over lack of flood relief from Centre

Karnataka CM Yediyurappa had stated that he was ‘walking a tightrope’ and before taking any decision, he had to think ten times about the implication

news Politics

Former Karnataka Chief Ministers HD Kumaraswamy and Siddaramaiah have joined the chorus to attack their successor BS Yediyurappa over his “tightrope” comment.

Talking to reporters in Davanagere, CM Yediyurappa had said, “Don’t take it the wrong way, but I want to say one thing that I'm walking a tightrope. Before taking any decision, I have to think about it 10 times as care should be taken about its implications.”

The comment was apparently made in context with the political situation in the state and the alleged interference of the BJP’s central leadership in the state’s matters.

Speaking on the issue, Siddaramaiah told reporters that he feels “sorry” for Yediyurappa as he is helpless.

“If he is walking a tightrope, he may trip and fall. If he is really feeling the heat, it is better he step down instead of clinging to power,” he told reporters. He added, “If he has no guts to seek funds, let him take an all-party delegation to Centre. We will do the asking.”

Later in subsequent tweets, he added, “I feel sad seeing Yediyurappa’s position. BJP high command has clipped the wings of Yediyurappa. His own party members are harassing him. They are not allowing Yediyurappa to discuss burning state issues also.”

“We from Congress had written a letter to Narendra Modi, requesting to meet him when he had come to Bengaluru on the day when Vikram Lander was supposed to land (on the lunar surface). He did not meet us. Even Yediyurappa is scared to talk to him about the flood situation. How to resolve this then?” the former CM further said.

HD Kumaraswamy who was the CM until recently also attacked Yediyurappa for failing to secure central government aid for the victims of the floods.

Taking to Twitter, he said, “Please look at the plight of those affected by floods from the top of tightrope. If your government is unable to rebuild the life of those displaced, people will bring you down from the tightrope (sic).”
