New IAF Chief: Always ready for Balakot-type air strikes

Sending out a stern message to Pakistan and China, incoming Air Chief Marshal Rakesh Kumar Singh Bhadauria asserted that the Rafale combat aircraft will give the Indian Air Force (IAF) an edge over its western as well as northern neighbours. Soon after taking over from his predecessor BS Dhanoa as the 26th Chief of the IAF, ACM Bhadauria (PVSM, AVSM, VM, ADC) on Monday, he also declared that his force was always ready to take action as and when required.



"Rafale is a very capable aircraft. It will be a game changer in our operational capability. It will give India an edge over Pakistan and China," said the ace fighter pilot. When asked if the IAF is better prepared to carry out another Balakot-like airstrike in the future, he asserted, "We were prepared then, we will be prepared next time. We will be ready to face any challenge, any threat. We are aware of the reports and we will take necessary action as and when required."



He added that he was aware that Pakistan had reactivated the Balakot terror camps that were bombed on February 26 in retaliation to the suicide attack carried out by JeM terrorists on a CRPF convoy in Pulwama.

BS Dhanoa Retires The incoming Air Chief Marshal took over as 26th Chief of the Indian Air Force (IAF) on Monday after Air Chief Marshal Birender Singh Dhanoa retired following 41 years of service with the force.

IAF will base its 36 Rafale jets in two squadrons. While 18 Rafale fighters will join the 17 Squadron 'Golden Arrows' at Ambala in Haryana to tackle Pakistani threats, the remaining 18 combat aircraft will be stationed in West Bengal's Hashimara to manage the front with China. The trainer version of the Rafale jet has the initial RB in honour of ACM Bhadauria's contribution in sealing the deal.



The Chief of Air Staff also spoke on Pakistan Prime Minister Imran Khan warning of a nuclear war with India. "That is their understanding of nuclear aspects. We have our own understanding, our own analysis. We will be ready to face any challenge," he explained.
