Chester Zoo lions are about to get a new home - and you can see it soon

Something went wrong, please try again later.

Sign up to our free newsletter for the top North Wales stories sent straight to your e-mail

A brand-new habitat for the world's rarest lions will open at Chester Zoo this month.

Three Asiatic lions are moving into a major new home - which spans more than 4,780 square metres - and people will be able to see it later this month.

The state-of-the-art habitat will be home to lions Iblis, Kumari and Kiburi, who are all 12 years old.

The area recreates the dry forest and savannah habitats of the Gir Forest region of India, which is home to the last surviving wild population of Asiatic lions.

It will boast a densely planted forest, raised hilltop viewing points for the lions to survey their savannah, heated rocks, a water hole and a sandy beach area.

Mike Jordan, animal and plant collections director at Chester Zoo , said: “The zoo’s new Asiatic lion habitat is modelled on the Gir Forest in Gujarat, India, the only place in the world where these highly endangered lions are now found.

(Image: Chester Zoo)





“This remaining wild population is incredibly fragile and coexist with the local livestock herders of the region.

"If disease hits or a natural disaster occurs then the species could easily become extinct."

Mr Jordan added: "It’s therefore extremely important that we continue to try and further our efforts as part of the international endangered species breeding programme that is working to boost Asiatic lion numbers.



“Asiatic lions have gone somewhat under the radar of conservation. But, with just 650 surviving in the wild, we must raise some much needed awareness of this beautiful, iconic species and inspire people to help us to prevent their extinction.”

(Image: Chester Zoo)

Asiatic lions, one of the rarest of all the big cat species, have suffered a huge decline in their natural range.

They once roamed across Northern Africa, Greece, Turkey and Asia but now just 650 wild Asiatic lions remain in one small region of India.

Tim Rowlands, Curator of Mammals at Chester Zoo , added: “Readying a group of lions to move home can be challenging and, over several months, our expert carnivore keepers have been encouraging the lions into specially designed moving crates using their favourite food. Slowly, day by day, the lions have become more and more comfortable spending time inside the crates.



“When the finishing touches have been made to their spectacular new habitat our trio Iblis, Kumari and Kiburi will make the short journey across the zoo ready to explore their new home.”

The Asiatic lion has suffered dramatic decline in recent decades as a result of poaching, habitat fragmentation and disease, but is slowly increasing and spreading in its natural environment.

The International Union for the Conservation of Nature (IUCN) classes the species as endangered – meaning it is still faced with a high chance of extinction.

Asiatic lions are generally shorter and smaller than their African cousins and can be identified because of their shaggier coat and the longer tassel on the end of their tails.

They’re so rare that not everyone realises they even exist.

It is a common mistake to assume lions are only found in Africa.
