Maharashtra Assembly polls 2019: BJP’s 1st list of 125 candidates out; Shiv Sena too comes up with its list

File picture: Shiv Sena Chief Uddhav Thackeray and Maharashtra Chief Minister Devendra Fadnavis | Photo Credit: PTI

Key Highlights The BJP has released names of 125 candidates; Maharashtra Assembly has 288 constituencies Shiv Sena too came up with its list, but only for 124 constituencies from where it will contest, not candidates The Election Commission has set October 4 as the last date for filing nominations

New Delhi: The Bharatiya Janata Party on Tuesday announced the names of 125 candidates for the Maharashtra Assembly Elections 2019, a day after announcing that it will contest the October 21 polls in an alliance with Shiv Sena and some smaller parties.

Shiv Sena too came up with its list, but only of the 124 constituencies from where it will contest, not candidates. Check Maharashtra Shiv Sena candidate list 2019 here. Notably, Shiv Sena chief Uddhav Thackeray's son, Aaditya Thackeray, will be contesting the Maharashtra Assembly Elections 2019 from the Worli constituency in south-central Mumbai.

The Election Commission has set October 4 as the last date for filing nomination.

Maharashtra BJP candidates' list

Maharashtra Chief Minister Devendra Fadnavis will fight the polls from the Nagpur South West seat, while Maharashtra unit chief of the BJP, Chandrakant Patil, will contest from Kothrud. BJP leader Pankaja Munda will contest from Parli seat, while Radhakrishna Vikhe Patil, who joined BJP recently, has been given ticket from Shirdi.

The list was released by the party's general secretary, Arun Singh. While addressing a press conference, Singh announced that the BJP had not given tickets to 12 of its MLAs.

"The BJP will contest the Maharashtra Assembly Election in an alliance with the Shiv Sena and some smaller parties," he said.

The names were approved by the BJP's Central Election Committee that met on Sunday. Prime Minister Narendra Modi, party president Amit Shah, working president JP Nadda, Defence Minister Rajnath Singh, Union Minister for Road Transport, Highways and Shipping Nitin Gadkari were some of the leaders who attended the CEC meeting.

The Central Election Committee has decided the following names for the ensuing Bye-election to the Parliamentary Constituency and General Election to the Legislative Assembly of Maharashtra:

Maharashtra will go to polls on October 21 for the 288 seats of the Assembly and one Parliamentary seat (Satara) bye-election, and the results will be announced on October 24.
