View: UN done, but India's 'Mission Kashmir' is still full of challenges

Things went according to plan at the UN for India. Its engagement on global issues, its reach in the international community and its diplomatic heft were in plain sight. As a result, some serious political capital went into the bank.Even though there was no India-US trade deal, US President Donald Trump , by and large, kept to the script. No venting on tariffs. On Kashmir, he offered his deal-making skills, but only if both sides wanted. Since India doesn’t want mediation, the story ends before it begins. Besides, like others before him, South Asia seems to have exhausted Trump: ‘Fellas, work it out. Just work it out.’ His message works fine for India, not for Pakistan.Despite valiant efforts, Pakistani Prime Minister Imran Khan ’s ‘ Mission Kashmir ’ was a flop. He got only three out of 193 countries in his corner at the UN. Turkey, Malaysia and China mentioned Kashmir, but said nothing spectacular that will gladden Khan’s heart. In fact, he admitted failure before departing. “Tell the captain, when you fight on our pitch, you lose,” riffed India’s permanent representative Syed Akbaruddin. “If Kashmir was a ‘Test’ for the UN,” he told me, “India won the match long ago.”It doesn’t mean Kashmir is off the radar. The lockdown is on people’s mind. Letters from the US Congress are flying, human rights groups are animated, as are Pakistan’s proxies. State machineries could get activated, if they see benefit. So far, the Trump government is more irritated with Khan than sympathetic.Prime Minister Narendra Modi and his advisers have a Test match of their own to win in Kashmir, now that they have remade the state. They know that democratic pressure in western societies to punish India can rise depending on various factors -- constituent pressure, advocacy from religious groups, and the still wide influence of the liberal establishment. US and British media will continue to shine the light -- even as they won’t acknowledge that Article 370 was envisaged as ‘temporary,’ despite briefings by senior officials. Their fundamental dislike of Modi often comes in the way of straightforward reporting.Even when the New York Times published an op-ed by India’s ambassador Harsh Vardhan Shringla, the editors took days for ‘fact-checking’ -- a standard that apparently was unnecessary for Khan’s propagandistic piece printed earlier. An offering by a respected Indian analyst to the Washington Post was rendered pointless, because all mentions of Pakistan’s terrorist enterprise were eliminated. He withdrew his piece.Fact-checking should have led the editors to their own intelligence agencies, and their own reporting in the past. Ample literature exists on Pakistan’s stable of terrorist groups, to say nothing of the deep studies by academics such as Christine Fair.Modi didn’t mention Pakistan or Kashmir for obvious reasons. Instead, he worked hard to project the ‘India difference’. His calendar was full. Whether world leaders were struck by his formidable mandate, or India’s inherent importance in achieving UN goals -- climate change, health care, education, poverty eradication -- is unclear. ‘Howdy, Modi!’ was often the opening line.He kept a hectic pace, used his time effectively and met leaders he may not be able to visit in their own countries. Over five days, he had 42 meetings in bilateral and plurilateral settings, including with Pacific Island and Caribbean countries. It was the first time in recent memory that India reached out to small and medium states that are the UN’s backbone.Modi also did nine ‘pull asides’, including with the king of Jordan, prime ministers of Norway, Singapore, Iceland and the Netherlands, presidents of South Korea, Chile and Kenya and the German chancellor. In fact, Angela Merkel joked that she couldn’t get on Modi’s calendar. Watching the excitement, a wise man suggested that the balance may be shifting away from the Anglosphere, if so many want to be on India’s calendar.Foreign Minister S Jaishankar’s schedule was equally manic -- 42 foreign ministers and three important public engagements in New York -- which should go some way in containing the Kashmir fallout. He explained, he demolished, he corrected and he argued – a much-needed counter-offensive to Khan’s radioactive rhetoric. He is now covering every conceivable think-tank in Washington.As for ‘Khan Unplugged’, the man clearly overplayed his hand. The Americans found his threats of an impending nuclear war ‘grating’, and Trump reportedly conveyed his irritation in private. You don’t talk about such things, he mused.The US State Department is not pleased either. Not only did it issue a restraining order of sorts, telling Khan to calm down, but it also publicly reminded him to spare some sympathy for his Muslim brothers in China, the Uighurs. Talk about a putdown.But here’s the thing. Last Friday, the Pakistanis managed to bring more protesters on the streets than Indians brought supporters. The reason -- the anti-Modi coalition is larger with human rights NGOs, Muslim organisations and leftist Indian Americans finding common cause.The battle is of the minds. Diplomatic outreach to state operatives can only go so far in how India is perceived. The Indian government has to find a way to both take care of the Kashmir situation peacefully once people in the valley are free to move around, and also convince Modi-sceptics of its larger vision.
