Gandhi’s 'Ram Rajya' – What the Mahatma meant by the term, and its significance today

Mahatma Gandhi (Photo courtesy Wikimedia Commons)

Key Highlights ‘Ram Rajya’ envisages a society in which virtue, morality and justice are the core ideals around which day-to-day interactions between citizen and citizen and state and citizen occur A devout Hindu, Gandhi was greatly influenced by the teachings of the Ramayana Gandhi said that for him a true Ram Rajya would ensure “equal rights to both prince and pauper”

Though Mahatma Gandhi may have coined the term in its modern avatar, the concept of ‘Ram Rajya’ has been a part of Indian thinking for centuries. The term has both a practical and a philosophical-cum-utopian aspect.

Practically, it can be described as a means of putting the idea of good governance at the centre of all governmental activity. But there is a deeper philosophical and spiritual resonance to the concept, which idealises Lord Rama as a perfect ruler.

What is Ram Rajya?

‘Ram Rajya’ envisages a society in which virtue, morality and justice are the core ideals around which day-to-day interactions between citizen and citizen and state and citizen occur. Since it is impossible to imagine such a perfect state of affairs, Ram Rajya, in the modern sense, is often thought of as an idealistic goal which governments should keep in mind and take inspiration from while implementing their governance agenda.

Gandhi and Ram Rajya

Mahatma Gandhi brought ‘Ram Rajya’ into contemporary discourse. A devout Hindu, Gandhi was greatly influenced by the teachings of the Ramayana. But what did Ram Rajya mean in the 20th century in the Gandhian sense?

Let the Mahatma speak for himself. “By Ram Rajya I do not mean Hindu Raj. I mean Ram Raj, the kingdom of God. For me, Ram and Rahim are one and the same; I acknowledge no other God than the one God of Truth and righteousness,” Gandhi wrote in ‘Young India’ in 1929. “Whether Ram of my imagination ever lived on this earth, the ancient ideal of the Ramayana is undoubtedly one of true democracy in which the meanest citizen could be sure of swift justice without an elaborate and costly procedure.”

On a later occasion, Gandhi explained that for him a true Ram Rajya would ensure “equal rights to both prince and pauper”.

Once, in a speech at Ayodhya's Sarayu ghat in 1921, he told the sadhus gathered there that praying to God for the sake of one's own protection was a sin if it did not involve protecting the weak. “We need to learn to love the way Rama loved Sita. As long as we do not observe our dharma conscientiously and with utmost faith and steadfastness, we shall not be able to destroy this demonic [British] government." He warned that under such circumstances, it would be “beyond the power of Hindus to bring back Ram Rajya.”

But for the Mahatma, such a Ram Rajya was not just a matter of communal harmony and protecting the defenceless, but also a conversation which every Indian should have with the self.

That’s why he considered ‘Ram Rajya’ as a means of seeing God. The first step towards creating such a benevolent land was looking within, Gandhi argued. A few months before he was assassinated, with "Hey, Ram" on this lips, Gandhi had written: “You have to magnify your own faults a thousand fold and shut your eyes to the faults of your neighbours. That is the only way to real progress."

The views expressed by the author are personal and do not in any way represent those of Times Network.
