Most Commented News Stories, Top Commented Articles

Why wait till 2047? Get rid of graft now, says PM Modi Prime Minister Narendra Modi on Sunday said corruption is “like a termite” that hollows the country and the task to make India corruption-free brooks no delay. He urged all citizens to work together to get rid of this menace as soon as possible. In his monthly radio address Mann ki Baat, the PM read a postcard addressed to him by a girl from Prayagraj mentioning her dream of a corruption-free India by 2047.

Akhilesh Yadav accepts Amit Shah's challenge for UP crime debate With the ruling BJP and leading opposition Samajwadi Party involved in claims and counter-claims over crime scene in UP under their respective regimes, BJP's chief poll strategist senior leader Amit Shah's recent challenge to former chief minister Akhilesh Yadav for a debate on the issue seems to have hit the right chords. Akhilesh Yadav on Sunday announced that he was ready for any challenge.

I&B ministry bans MediaOne news channel again, HC stays implementation of order for 2 days The Union government on Monday barred the telecast of Malayalam news channel MediaOne citing "security reasons", but the Kerala High Court stayed the implementation of the order for two days.The Centre's move drew the ire of many, with the opposition Congress party terming the move as "undemocratic". When contacted, I&B ministry officials confirmed that the channel has been banned but did not share any further details.

RSS man held for restraining two women in Tamil Nadu Pudukottai police have arrested a 38-year-old RSS functionary on charges of "wrongfully restraining" two women, accusing them of indulging in acts relating to religious conversion.

Bigg Boss 15 winner: Tejasswi Prakash lifts the trophy, Rs 40 lakh cash prize and bags Ekta Kapoor's Naagin 6 Tejasswi Prakash is the winner of Bigg Boss 15. After completing grueling tasks, several fights, emotional ups and downs and spending 120 days in the house, the ultimate title holder of the season is Tejasswi. She defeated co-contestant Pratik Sehajpal.

US lawmaker calls Pak's US envoy-designate a 'jihadist', wants his nomination rejected Calling Pakistan's new ambassador-designate to the United States Masood Khan a "jihadist," and a "terrorist sympathiser," an American lawmaker has urged the Biden administration to reject his diplomatic credentials amid continued deterioration in Washington's ties with Islamabad.

Why Ramachandra Guha blames Congress for revisionism of history The historian says that the current debates on India’s historical figures isn’t driven by research but says the blame lies more with the Congress than the ruling party

Maharashtra: Shiv Sena MP Sanjay Raut’s daughters operate wine distribution company, says BJP leader Kirit Somaiya The BJP and the MVA partners continue to spar over the government decision to allow the sale of wine in supermarkets.

Poll curbs may be eased as EC to review ban on rallies today Amid improving vaccination status and declining graph of daily Covid cases in the poll-bound states, the Election Commission will on Monday review its ban on big political rallies and roadshows after hearing the assessment of the health ministry and respective state governments.

Budget session from today with reduced legislative time The government and the MPs will get a total of only 79.5 hours, around 60% of the scheduled sitting hours, for pursuing their legislative agenda and raising issues of immediate public concern in the Rajya Sabha during the first half of the Budget session that commences on Monday.

Maharashtra: Fees up 15% for bars and 70% for wine shops In a move that has not only surprised hoteliers but patrons too, the state excise department has increased annual excise fees recovered from all bars by 15% and as much as by 70% for wine shops.

Influencer Freddy Birdy reacts to Deepika Padukone's 'moron' remark: It's the only non-fake thing you've uttered Social media influencer Freddy Birdy's recently commented on the length of Deepika Padukone and Ananya Panday's clothes during 'Gehraiyaan' promotions. This led to the war of words between him and Deepika.

Original PoA not needed, copy enough to sell property: Supreme Court In a big warning to property owners who intend to sell their assets through a power of attorney (PoA) holder, the Supreme Court has ruled that the PoA holder can sell the property and register the sale by merely producing a copy of the PoA and that the original was not mandatory for registration of the sale.

Haryana cops abduct man from Rajasthan, transfer bitcoin worth Rs 9 crore Sirsa police have booked assistant sub-inspector (ASI) Shiv Kumar and four other police employees from Sonipat for allegedly kidnapping a man from Jaipur in neighbouring Rajasthan and transferring 30 bitcoins, worth about Rs 9 crore, from the complainant's mobile to another account.

Cash-strapped Pakistan looks to secure $3-billion loan from China Cash-trapped Pakistan is looking to secure a $3-billion loan from China and investments in half a dozen sectors during Prime Minister Imran Khan's visit to Beijing next week, according to a media report on Sunday. Khan will visit the Chinese capital on February 3 to attend the opening of the Beijing Winter Olympics and hold bilateral talks.

2021 saw 21% jump in prisoners on death row to 488 The number of prisoners on death row across India has soared by more than a fifth to 488 from 404 in 2020 – which is also the highest it has been since 2004 when 563 faced capital punishment. ‘Death Penalty in India: Annual Statistics Report 2021’ attributes the almost 21% spike to trial courts handing down more capital sentences than before the pandemic, coupled with higher courts pronouncing on far fewer appeals because of their limited functioning.

Why Hamid Ansari is wrong about Hindu nationalism That India abounds in plurality does not mean there’s no thread of cultural continuity

MVA future of politics in Maharashtra, no scope of a reunion with BJP: Sanjay Raut Slamming Prime Minister Narendra Modi for turning India’s politics into an event, Shiv Sena MP Sanjay Raut on Sunday said that the Maha Vikas Aghadi (MVA) was the future of politics in Maharashtra and there was no room for the Sena re-uniting with the BJP again.

After criticism, Karnataka CM Basavaraj Bommai promises new towing policy Chief minister Basavaraj Bommai on Sunday said the government will soon unveil a new vehicle towing policy.

Why India needs more Indians to pay direct tax Barely 60 million Indians file income tax returns, and half of these file zero or nearly zero income tax, which makes up for only seven income tax payers for every 100 voters. This ratio is much higher in developed economies and it is 100:100 in Northern European countries

Gurugram ‘namaz' row: SC agrees to hear plea for contempt action against Haryana officials The Supreme Court on Monday agreed to list for urgent hearing a former Rajya Sabha lawmaker's plea seeking contempt action against top Haryana government officials over alleged disruptions in the offering of Friday ‘namaz' in Gurugram.

Child with mental disability is entitled to family pension: Govt Union minister for personnel Jitendra Singh on Sunday said mentally challenged child of a deceased government employee or pensioner is entitled to family pension and the spirit of this provision needs to be understood and respected.

PIL in SC seeks stay on 'Why I Killed Gandhi' online release A petition has been filed in the Supreme Court seeking a stay on the film "Why I Killed Gandhi", which is set to release on various OTT platforms on January 30, the anniversary of Mahatma Gandhi's assassination.

No more the captain, Virat Kohli talks about contributing more as a batter Citing Mahendra Singh Dhoni as an example, Virat Kohli says one doesn't need to be a captain of a team to be a leader and now that he is not the India skipper, he might contribute more as the side's batting mainstay. "When MS Dhoni was in the team, it was not like he was not the leader, he was still the guy from whom we wanted to have inputs," Kohli said.

No moral policing if willingly converted: Madhya Pradesh HC The Madhya Pradesh high court has ruled that no "moral policing" can be allowed when two adults decide to live together by way of marriage or a live-in relationship of their own will.

Man, son arrested for raping teen girl in Thane A scrap dealer and his son were arrested in Thane city for allegedly raping a 16-year-old girl repeatedly, police said on Sunday.

Mumbai: Auto driver reunites teen girl with Delhi kin A 14-year-old runaway, who left her home in Delhi after her mother pulled her up for not studying ahead of her Std 10 exams, was reunited with her parents by an alert auto rickshaw driver in Vasai on Saturday.

It may be easier for Virat Kohli to break batting records without responsibility of captaincy: Ricky Ponting Ricky Ponting, one of the most successful captains ever, hailed Virat Kohli for his leadership skills, saying that under him India had improved its overseas record by winnings more Tests abroad than before. He also backed Rohit Sharma to do well as Kohli's successor.

Doctor working in London hospital dies by suicide at Delhi home A 40-year-old doctor, who was working at a London hospital, allegedly died by suicide at her residence in south Delhi's Greater Kailash, police said on Monday.

Deepika Padukone takes a dig at influencer Freddy Birdy after he shared a sarcastic post on her film ‘Gehraiyaan’ Bollywood actress Deepika Padukone is currently making headlines, for her upcoming film ‘Gehraiyaan’ which is all set to hit the OTT screens on Feb 11, 2022.

Budget 2022: Lower income tax rates, new slabs - TOI-Deloitte Survey finds top asks of common person Budget 2022 tax expectations: Interestingly, if the 30% tax rate were to kick in at Rs 20 lakh, the resulting tax savings would be more for individuals opting for the old tax regime versus the new.

BJP MP Rita Bahuguna Joshi’s son Mayank likely to join Samajwadi Party Mayank's joining Akhilesh Yadav-led SP would be another jolt to the BJP after about a dozen MLAs, including three ministers, quit the party earlier this month.

Saba Azad doesn't deny she was with Hrithik Roshan but excuses herself, saying, "I'll call you back" - Exclusive! Was the masked girl hand-in-hand with Hrithik Roshan, this weekend, indeed actress Saba Azad (of 'Dil Kabaddi', 'Mujhse Fraaandship Karoge')? Has Hrithik too like his ex-wife Sussanne Khan found love? Or, were Hrithik and Saba just out for a friendly dinner? Too many questions in everybody's mind!

Teacher comes under truck wheel, dies in Bengaluru A 48-year-old woman riding pillion on a bike died instantly after a pick-up truck ran over the vehicle near Anjanapura bus stop on Magadi Main Road, on Sunday morning.

Karnataka: Udupi girls' college not to allow hijab in classrooms The government girl's PU college in Udupi has categorically informed that students wearing ‘hijab' (Islamic headscarf) will not be allowed inside classrooms.

How the plot to assassinate Gandhi was hatched In his new book, the investigative journalist examines Nathuram Godse’s relationship with the organisations that influenced his politics and firmed his beliefs, which eventually led him to shoot Mahatma Gandhi in the chest three times at point blank range in New Delhi on January 30, 1948. The following is a book excerpt:

Covid-19: 3 shots okayed last year still not part of vaccination drive Three vaccines against Covid-19 — Covovax, Corbevax and ZyCov-D — which received the Drug Controller General of India’s nod last year for emergency use in the country are yet to be used in the immunisation drive, raising questions on the delay in their utilisation. While Zydus Cadila’s ZyCoV-D was granted emergency use authorisation on August 20 last year, the authorisation was given to Serum Institute’s Covovax on December 28 and to Biologocal E’s Corbevax on December 29.

Economic Survey tabled in Parliament; projects 8-8.5% growth rate for FY23 Finance minister Nirmala Sitharaman tabled the Economic Survey 2021-22 in Parliament on Monday. It presents details of state of the economy ahead of the government's budget for the fiscal year beginning April 1, 2022.

Mumbai: Woman pub manager stalked & harassed; two booked Two men were arrested by the Khar police on Saturday for sexually harassing a female manager at a suburban pub. The woman told the police that the duo would stare at her, stalk her inside the pub and make inappropriate comments.

Australian Open: Rafael Nadal's mightiest comeback secures 21st Grand Slam Rafael Nadal roared back from two sets down to win a titanic five-set duel with Daniil Medvedev and make history with "a special" 21st Grand Slam men's title in the Australian Open final on Sunday. The Spanish great looked dead and buried as the Russian world number two carved out a two-set lead but Nadal surged home for one of his mightiest comeback wins 2-6, 6-7 (5/7), 6-4, 6-4, 6-4 in 5hr 24min on Rod Laver Arena.

Mumbai: Decade-old divorce battle ends in reunion A decade-long divorce battle recently ended on a happy note with the husband taking the wife home after her 12-year-long 'incarceration' at a mental health hospital following a magistrate's order.

Rafael Nadal, Ash Barty give Australian Open desperately needed happy ending An Australian Open like no other began in controversy with the deportation of Novak Djokovic but culminated in one of the greatest comebacks in tennis history by Rafael Nadal on Sunday.

Noida: Gas pipeline first hurdle to twin tower demolition The plan to bring down the Supertech twin towers in Sector 93A has hit the first hurdle. The Mumbai-based company entrusted with the job of the demolition exercise has learnt that an underground gas pipeline runs within 15 metres of the two towers - Apex and Ceyane.

Mumbai: Cops scan 150 CCTVs between Andheri and Ghatkopar, nab mobile thieves Two motorcycle-borne mobile thieves were caught after the Andheri Police scanned at least 150 CCTVs between Marol, Saki Naka, Ghatkopar and airport.

Did Hrithik Roshan and Saba Azad meet through a common friend? Details inside Ever since Hrithik Roshan was clicked with a mystery girl speculated to be Saba Azad, everyone is keen on knowing more about them.

Sensex jumps 814 points as Economic Survey projects 8-8.5% GDP growth for FY23; Nifty ends above 17,300 Equity indices surged on Monday with the benchmark BSE sensex rising over 1,000 points ahead of Economic Survey release. The benchmark BSE sensex started the session on a positive note, and surged 1,034 points or 1.8 per cent racking gains in index-majors Wipro, Bajaj Finance and Infosys amid a positive trend in the Asian markets.

How Gandhi spent his last days before assassination The killing of the father of the nation, writes his grandson in this excerpt of his 2017 book, only served to seal India’s pledge to be a secular state — and a nation for all its citizens — a pledge that largely went honoured

Telangana sees drastic drop in number of Covid-19 tests The number of tests for Covid-19 dropped to 65,263 on Sunday from 95,355 on January 29. Of them, 2,484 samples were tested positive for Covid-19, taking the cumulative case load to 7,61,050.The number of deaths dropped from one (on January 29) to two.

Bihar: Man visits girlfriend, forced to get married A youth was forcibly married when he went to a nearby village to meet his ladylove on Saturday. Sources said one Aditya Kumar of Bariahi Chanan reached a mustard field in the nearby Rachiyahi village under Chakia police outpost area of the district to meet his girlfriend. However, a few villagers saw them together and thrashed Aditya and held him captive.

The officer who saved Mumbai from Khalistani threat Most of us associate controversial police officer Aftab Ahmad Khan with the Lokhandwala shootout because the encounter was turned into a Bollywood film. But did you know about the bloodier gun-battle with Khalistani militants he led in Mumbai’s Vikhroli and the arrest of a Kanishka bombing accused in Dadar?

4 killed, 2 hurt as teen ploughs dad’s SUV into Telangana footpath A 16-year-old boy who was driving an SUV at high speed ended up running over four labourers on a pavement on Sunday morning in Karimnagar district.Three persons died on the spot, while the fourth succumbed in hospital. Two more were injured and are recovering in hospital.

US Congressman urges Joe Biden to reject appointment of 'jihadist' as Pakistan ambassador to US US Congressman Scott Perry has written a scathing letter to US President Joe Biden over the proposed appointment of Masood Khan as Pakistani envoy to the US. In the letter, Perry has called Khan a "terror sympathizer" who praised "terror organisations/terrorists like Hizbul Mujahideen and Burhan Wani".

Bengaluru youth finds his own video on porn site, files complaint A 25-year-old youth from Austin Town has demanded legal action alleging that some miscreants have uploaded a video clip of him and his girlfriend on pornographic sites.

EC extends ban on roadshows, vehicle rallies till February 11 The Election Commission on Monday extended the ban on roadshows, vehicle rallies and processions till February 11, but relaxed curbs on the number of people that can attend physical public meetings, indoor meetings and door-to-door campaigns.

Karnataka: DK Shivakumar-Siddaramaiah discord comes to fore again The discord between opposition leader Siddaramaiah and KPCC president DK Shivakumar came to the fore again for the second time in 48 hours, when a vid eo of Siddaramaiah criticising the KPCC president’s political strategies emerged. The video has been widely shared on social media.

Rafael Nadal wins record 21st Slam title with Australian Open comeback victory over Daniil Medvedev Rafael Nadal edged Daniil Medvedev in a classic Australian Open final on Sunday, roaring back from two sets down to claim a record 21st Grand Slam title only months after fearing his glorious career might be over due to injury.
