BJP’s Dadwe rebels, set to contest from Central

Nagpur: Fissures have started showing in the party soon after the BJP declared its first list on Tuesday.

City vice-president Bhushan Dadwe, a strong OBC leader, has decided to contest from Nagpur Central constituency after being denied a ticket. The party has reposed faith in MLA Vikas Kumbhare against whom there were accusations of being a poor performer. Kumbhare will be eyeing a hat-trick from the constituency.

According to BJP activists, Kumbhare was retained as he belonged to the Halba community which has a massive voter base in the constituency. They felt that if he was replaced, the Halbas would revolt. Also, the party would have found it difficult to retain the seat if the large majority of Muslims too would have gone against it.

An angry Dadwe warned that the OBC community of over 80,000 voter base in Nagpur Central would teach a lesson to the saffron alliance for ignoring them all these years. He said even former mayor Pravin Datke was overlooked and this was “injustice” to the community.

“I am not saying that I should get ticket. But at least don’t ignore the other deserving candidates like Datke, Kishor Palandurkar and Anandrao Thawre among others. Are we supposed to remain quiet despite working hard for the party,” asked Dadwe.

Dadwe, who claimed to have fought for getting C grade status for Smriti Mandir of RSS, had warned the BJP top brass of a revolt. He claimed to be getting offers from various opposition parties to join their ranks and would decide the future course of action soon. “Prakash Ambedkar asked me to join Vanchit Bahujan Aghadi (VBA). Many others are also approaching with tickets. I am the only candidate who worked for all communities and has cordial relations with everyone.”

On facing disciplinary action, Dadwe took a dig at BJP leaders on granting tickets to outsiders like Radhakrishna Vikhe Patil and Udayan Raje Bhonsale who switched sides from Congress and NCP, respectively. “These leaders from opposition always used to criticize the BJP, but now they’re getting all the favours, while deserving ones are left out.”

When TOI spoke to Dadwe, he was collecting no-objection certificates (NOCs) from the Nagpur Municipal Corporation’s (NMC) various offices, which is mandatory requirement for filling up the nomination forms. “I am preparing for contesting the polls for my community and it has nothing to do with Kumbhare personally. I have worked hard for development of the constituency and bringing projects here. I’ve also fought for beautification of Deekshabhoomi, Tekdi Ganesh Temple and Bada Tajbagh. I worked hard for convincing the municipal authorities for beautification of city’s lakes,” he said.



Facebook Twitter Linkedin EMail
