Goyal may give relief to salaried class, farmers

sanjiv@tribunemail.com

Aditi Tandon

Tribune News Service

New Delhi, January 31

The BJP-led NDA government is expected to announce some major populist measures in its sixth and last Budget tomorrow ahead of General Election.

Close on the heels of BJP’s losses in Madhya Pradesh, Rajasthan and Chhattisgarh, the Budget presentation offers the last opportunity to PM Narendra Modi to woo voters, especially farmers, youth, small traders and salaried class.

Among the anticipated measures, interim Finance Minister Piyush Goyal may announce tomorrow in the Lok Sabha are tax sops, including potential raise in the income tax exemption ceiling.

The raise is being anticipated ever since the government piloted and Parliament passed the law reserving 10 per cent quota for General Category poor in jobs and education. The law prescribes annual income ceiling of Rs 8 lakh for the beneficiary family. Expectations of a hike in I-T exemption ceiling have been raised after the passage of the quota law with people asking how can taxpayers be treated as poor?

A meaty new largesse for the distressed farming sector may also be announced with the BJP government feeling the pinch of serial debt waivers by Congress governments across various states.

BJP insiders say the government is also under pressure to counter Congress president Rahul Gandhi’s latest poll slogan of minimum guaranteed income for the poor, something the Congress announced to pre-empt any major election announcement in the Budget tomorrow.

A direct cash transfer into farmers' accounts has been among the speculated Budget sops with PM Modi today assuring the Opposition that the government would present an Interim Budget.

“The PM told us today that the government will present an Interim Budget tomorrow. He said reports on the presentation of a full Budget were wrong,” Leader of Opposition in the Rajya Sabha Ghulam Nabi Azad said after the all-party meeting the government convened to discuss Budget Session agenda.

After PM’s assurance, Congress leaders argued that the government would not have much elbow room for poll-related announcements though it could still play around with indirect taxes.

Earlier in the day, PM Modi urged the Opposition to cooperate in the running of Parliament and in helping pass government’s pro-people agenda.

“We all saw what happened in the last session. People these days are conscious. They are watching us in Parliament. And they feel aghast at disruptions and at those who disrupt. It’s a good occasion for us to engage constructively in debates. That way we will be in a better position to face the electorate,” PM Modi said at the start of the Budget Session.

Opposition parties, meanwhile, warned the government against bringing any contentious Bills, especially the Citizenship Amendment Bill.

“We have told the government not to bring any contentious Bill. The Citizenship Amendment Bill is a dangerous Bill. If contentious Bills are brought, the government would have to take the responsibility for what happens,” TMC’s Derek O Brien said. The Congress and TMC are opposed to the Citizenship Amendment Bill.

Opposition meeting on EVMs today
