NSA Ajit Doval counters Pakistan’s narrative on Kashmir in meet with Saudi Crown Prince Mohammad Bin Salman

NSA Ajit Doval: Ajit Doval has met Saudi Arabia's Crown Prince Mohammad Bin Salman in Riyadh. The meeting comes days after Indian and Pakistani premiers delivered their UNGA speech in New York. Reports said that Kashmir was discussed in the meeting.

NSA Ajit Doval: Days after Prime Minister Narendra Modi and his Pakistani counterpart Imran addressed the 74th session of United Nations General Assembly (UNGA), National Security Advisor Ajit Doval on Wednesday met with Saudi Arabia’s Crown Prince Mohammad Bin Salman. Doval met MBS in Riyadh and countered Pakistan’s narrative on Kashmir.The one-on-one meeting lasted for two hours.

Reports said that MBS has expressed an understanding of the BJP-led NDA government’s August 5 move and subsequent actions in Jammu and Kashmir. Both the NSA and MBS also discussed bilateral issues between the two countries. The meeting comes on the day when the whole country is celebrating Gandhi Jayanti — the 150th birth anniversary of Mahatma Gandhi.

Doval will also leave for the United Arab Emirates today to meet top leaders. Saudi Arabia and the UAE are the countries that are close to India and have supported India’s stand on Kashmir that it was a bilateral issue. The relation is so close that both the Islamic countries had given PM Modi their highest civilian honors.

Before the UNGA session in New York, PM Khan had met MBS in Saudi Arabia. The Crown Prince even gave Khan a private jet to travel to the United States. Otherwise, he was scheduled to use a commercial flight. Despite trying his best, Khan’s efforts went futile as Saudi Arabia did not mention Kashmir in the UNGA speech and the UAE followed the suit.

Though Pakistan got the support of Turkey, Malaysia, and its all-weather ally China, it failed to get the support what the country had hoped. In his maiden UNGA address, Khan’s speech was related to Kashmir. He leveled serious allegation of human rights abuses against India. He also warned the United Nations that nuclear war could erupt anytime if the Kashmir issue was not resolved.

India in its right to reply remembered Pakistan that it had no moral authority to talk about Kashmiris since the country was persecuting and suppressing its minorities. MAE First Secretary Vidisha Maitra said that Pakistan was home to dozens of UN-designated terrorists.

For all the latest National News, download NewsX App
