It Is A 'jihad', Says Imran On Kashmir After Returning From The US

Prime Minister Imran Khan on his return from the US on Sunday said that those standing by Kashmiris were doing "jihad" and Pakistan will support Kashmiris even if the world does not.

Imran Khan, who focussed on the Kashmir issue in his maiden address to the UN General Assembly, told his party workers at the airport here that "whether the world is with the Kashmiris or not, we are standing with them." "It (standing by Kashmiris) is jihad. We are doing it because we want Allah to be happy with us," he said.

READ| Imran Khan hammered online for 'jihad in Afghanistan' admission

"It is a struggle and does not lose heart when the time is not good. Do not be disappointed as the Kashmiris are looking towards you," he said. He said, "Kashmiris would win if the Pakistani people stood by their side". Khan on Friday raised the Kashmir issue in his address to the UNGA and demanded that India must lift the "inhuman curfew" in Kashmir and release all "political prisoners".

In Imran Khan's speech that went on for about 50 minutes, far exceeding the 15-minute limit for UN speeches during the General Debate, he devoted half of his address to the Kashmir issue, warning that if there's a face-off between two nuclear-armed neighbours, the consequences would be far beyond their borders.

READ| Pakistan & Terrorism: 6 Freudian slips by Pak leaders on Osama, Hafiz Saeed & Masood Azhar that give it all away

His war rhetoric was in sharp contrast to Prime Minister Narendra Modi's peace message from the same podium few minutes earlier in which he said India is a country, that has "given the world, not war, but Buddha's message of peace." Pakistan has been trying to internationalise the Kashmir issue after India withdrew the special status of Jammu and Kashmir on August 5, but New Delhi has asserted the abrogation of Article 370 was its "internal matter".

India's decision evoked strong reactions from Pakistan, which downgraded diplomatic ties and expelled the Indian ambassador. PTI SH India ended Jammu and Kashmir's special status by abrogating Article 370 of its Constitution on August 5.

India's decision evoked strong reactions from Pakistan, which downgraded diplomatic ties and expelled the Indian ambassador. Pakistan has been trying to internationalise the Kashmir issue after India withdrew the special status of Jammu and Kashmir on August 5, but New Delhi has asserted the abrogation of Article 370 was its "internal matter".

READ| Case filed against Pak PM Imran Khan in Bihar court for UNGA speech
