Pragya Thakur missing from BJP’s Gandhi Jayanti events

BHOPAL/INDORE: The absence of BJP MP Pragya Thakur at the ‘Sankalp Yatra’ and outreach programmes organised by the party in Bhopal to mark the 150th birth anniversary of Mahatma Gandhi came as a surprise on Wednesday.Pragya did not join BJP leaders in the padyatra, nor did she attend any function in her Lok Sabha constituency to pay tribute to Mahatma Gandhi. Party sources said that the state leadership was unwilling to invite Pragya to any Gandhi Jayanti programme because of her praise of Nathuram Godse during the LS campaign, which had earned the ire of PM Narendra Modi. She had called Godse a ‘deshbhakt’, and since then the BJP is under relentless attack for “glorifying Godse”.Leaders close to Pragya, however, said she is travelling. “Didi is not in Bhopal. She has no programmes today (Gandhi Jayanti) and will return after a week,” Pragya’s assistant Upma told TOI over phone. After some more calls, Pragya’s close confidante Bhagwan Jha said that she is not participating in any programme as she is in a Shivir. “There is no local programme where Pragya ji will participate today. I am not aware of her forthcoming engagements,” said Jha.The BJP central leadership had instructed all Lok Sabha members to attend public outreach programmes, from Gandhi Jayanti till the end of the month, where welfare schemes launched for the poor and marginalised by PM Narendra Modi would be popularised. “MPs have been asked to participate in Sankalp Yatra and highlight PM Modi’s contribution to the nation,” said BJP state spokesperson Deepak Vijayavargiya. “The party leadership has made it clear that all workers will propagate Bapu’s teachings on truth and justice at Gandhi Jayanti programmes.”Pragya’s absence was felt by district unit workers, who had organised a march in Bhopal to pay tribute to Gandhi. Former chief ministers Uma Bharti and Shivraj Singh Chouhan attended the programmes. “Pragya ji did not join us for the Gandhi Jayanti programme as she had prior engagements during Navratri. She will attend the rest of the programmes as MPs have been asked by the party to manage their assignments anytime till October 31,” said BJP Bhopal district president Vikas Virani.Sources in BJP, however, say she is unlikely to join Gandhi Jayanti celebrations, as per party instructions. Congress is ready with an arsenal to attack Pragya if she does. Already, Congress leaders have started calling Pragya ‘Hinsa ki Pujarin’ on social media posts and in posters in Indore.“Pragya has shamed BJP and all other politicians who take an oath to follow the path shown by Bapu. BJP has double standards, which is why Pragya is unwilling to join Gandhi Jayanti programmes despite clear instructions from her party leadership. This drama has been exposed,” said Congress state spokesperson Narendra Singh Saluja.In Indore, some Congress workers erected a hoarding that called Pragya ‘Hinsa ki Pujarin’ and had the message: “The party that follows Godse, will it ever expel Pragya Thakur?” It was put up just behind a statue of Gandhi after former CM Digvijaya Singh and other senior leaders paid tribute there. Police removed the poster.“During Lok Sabha polls, Thakur had called Godse a patriot and Prime Minister Narendra Modi had said that he will never forgive the party’s candidate for the remarks. Its BJP’s hypocrisy that it’s celebrating 150th birth anniversary of Mahatma Gandhi but yet to take actions against the Bhopal MP for his supporting the killer of Bapu and his ideology of violence” Congress city’s spokesperson Girish Joshi told TOI.
