Haryana Assembly Election 2019: INLD releases first list of 64 candidates

Indian National Lok Dal (INLD) on Wednesday released its first list of candidates for the upcoming Haryana Assembly Elections 2019. The 90-seat state assembly is set to go to polls on October 21.

In its first list, INLD has announced candidates for 64 seats.

MLA and a prominent face in the party, Abhay Singh Chautala has been fielded from his current seat Ellenabad. The list includes 11 women candidates. At an earlier rally, Om Prakash Chaulata had announced that the party will have at least 33 per cent women candidates.

Draught of political bigwigs in INLD

INLD, formed by former deputy prime minister the late Devi Lal, has suffered a series of setbacks during the past one year after its split because of a feud in the Chautala family. Most of INLD's sitting MLAs and prominent leaders have switched over to the BJP ahead of polls.

In the outgoing assembly, INLD has 19 legislators, but two of its MLAs died and several switched over to BJP.

INLD turncoats nominated by BJP

Several INLD turncoats, the majority of them sitting MLAs, have been given tickets by the BJP. Among them are Ranbir Gangwa who will fight from Nalwa, Zakir Hussain from Nuh, Naseem Ahmed from Ferozepur Jhirkha, Nagender Bhadana from Faridabad NIT, Ram Chand Kamboj from Rania.

Besides, INLD leader from Rohtak district, Satish Nandal, who also joined the BJP recently, will fight from Garhi Sampla Kiloi, from where former chief minister Bhupinder Singh Hooda is sitting legislator.

Ram Kumar Kashyap, former INLD leader who switched over to BJP, will fight from Indri. Parminder Dhull, an MLA who too crossed over to saffron outfit,will fight from his seat Julana.

Free electricity, farm loan waiver on INLD's poll agenda

In a bid to woo farmers ahead of the Haryana assembly polls, the Indian National Lok Dal has promised to waive loans up to Rs 10 lakh. The party also announced to implement the recommendations of the Swaminathan commission besides promising free electricity for agricultural purposes.

Earlier addressing the rally, senior party leader Abhay Singh Chautala had said the electricity bill for domestic consumption would also be halved for farmers.

He said Rs 5 lakh for each woman would be given Rs 5 lakh as "kanyadan" at the time of her marriage.

In addition, they would be provided with free higher education, he said, adding that the security and welfare of the women would be their top priority.

Abhay Singh also promised a job to at least one member of a family and an unemployment allowance of Rs 15,000 to the youth.

He said Chaudhary Devi Lal had recognised tractor as an integral part of the farmers' needs and had exempted it from taxes by terming it as their "gadda".

"On coming to power, we will bear all expenses for the registration of tractors," he said.

In recognition of the contribution of Haryana's youth to defending the borders of the country, he promised to provide them with two-room houses.

Haryana Assembly Election 2019 | Follow full coverage

The Election Commission (EC) has slated the single-phase voting for the 90-member Haryana Assembly elections on October 21 and the counting of votes is scheduled on October 24.

The process of filing nominations for Haryana and Maharashtra ässembly polls began on September 27.

The last date of filing nominations is October 4 and the scrutiny will take place on October 5. The candidates can withdraw their nomination till October 7.

Haryana has the strength of 90 seats out of which 17 are reserved for SCs and none for STs. There are 1.82 crore registered voters in the state out of which 1.07 lakh are service voters.

(With inputs from PTI)
