AASU warns Centre it will launch stir on Citizenship Bill

Student Union threatens stir if Modi govt enacts new law.

Guwahati: A day after Union home minister Amit Shah announced to bring in the Citizenship (Amendment) Bill, the powerful All Assam Students’ Union (Aasu) warned that New Delhi should not play with the sentiments of the people of Assam and other states of the northeastern states.

Referring the statement of union home minister, the Aasu also threatened that it would be forced to launch a democratic movement if the Centre tries to impose the CAB against the wishes of the people.

Defining the CAB in violation to the spirit of the Assam Accord, the Aasu general secretary Mr Lurin Jyoti Gogoi said that the students’ body was not prepared to accept it.

He pointed out that as per the Assam Accord, all foreigners, who came to Assam after March 24, 1971 should be detected and deported irrespective of their religion.

He also regretted that the Centre’s move to try and give citizenship to foreigners on the basis of religion is unconstitutional as India is a secular country. “The imposition of the CAB would pose a threat to the political rights, language and culture of the indigenous people of Assam and other northeastern states. Just because the ruling party has the majority in Parliament, it may try to pass the Bill forcibly. This is not a healthy sign for democracy,” said the student leader while referring the growing polarisation against the controversial bill in the northeast. The statement of union home minister has surcharged the atmosphere in all the northeastern states as North East Students Organisation was also opposing the CAB. It is significant that the coordination committee of NGOs in Mizoram is also opposing the CAB and decided to oppose the visit of Mr Shah to Mizoram on October 5.

The members of NGO coordination committee has decided to wear black dresses, carry placards and wave black flags along the route from the airport to Aizawl town in protest. The leader of state’s biggest youth organisation — Mizo Zirlai Pawl Mr Ricky Lalbiakmawia told reporters that protesters would wear “pawndum”, a shawl worn by Mizos during funerals, during Mr Shah’s visit to Aizawl.
