Mahatma Gandhi is not just past, it is future as well: Congress

Gandhiji is not just past but it is future as well, Congress leaders said here on Wednesday as its six-day twin Gandhi Sandesh Yatra concluded at Kochrab Ashram. Leaders said ideals of Gandhiji are more relevant today in the country and Gujarat will once again take a lead in taking the country on the Gandhian path.



Talking to media persons in the city, Paresh Dhanani, the leader of the opposition in state Legislative Assembly said that the country and the state are being drifted into a state of anarchy in the name of religion, which is contrary to the ideals of truth and non-violence propagated by Mahatma Gandhi.



Now two Gujaratis are trying to drag the country once again towards slavery using falsehood and violence. So this is the time to revive Gandhiji in ourselves, Dhanani added.



"It is time to say I am Gandhi. Gandhi is not just a person but a thought. We have to tune our thoughts and actions the way Gandhiji wanted it to be. In the current era, when the country is being drawn towards falsehood and violence, Gujarat will once again lead the country in its second fight for independence," said Dhanani.



Central and state governments and are misusing the provisions of the Land Acquisition Act to grab the land from the farmers, Congress party had alleged on Saturday, during the second day of its six-day twin-yatras that were supposed to converge at Gandhi Ashram on Gandhi Jayanti.



The party had organized twin - Gandhi Sandesh Yatra. One departed from Dandi, the place of Salt Satyagraha during the Civil Disobedience Movement that had reached Ahmedabad on Wednesday. This yatra was led by the Gujarat Pradesh Congress Committee president Amit Chavda. While the second yatra had departed from Porbandar, the birthplace of Mahatama Gandhi. This yatra was led by Paresh Dhanani.



Throughout the yatra, Congress leaders tried to revive the ideals of Gandhiji and exposing the current governments at the state and centre, also raised issues of forcible land acquisition, inhumane and irrational amendments into the Motor Vehicle Act. They also said that the policies of the state and central government have brought an industrial and economic slowdown in the country and depriving the youth of rightful employment.
