ASEAN Update : WTO-MYR-IDR-THB-INR and why the oil price bounce

Overnight U.S. market recap



Following the US ADP employment report miss, U.S. Treasury yields fell; the Yen soared, The S&P 500 suffered its first back-to-back drops of more than 1% this year, Crude futures tanked to their weakest levels in a month while gold prices rallied back to the critical $ 1500 level.



Asia Market update



Its been a rough start for Asia stocks after the World Trade Organization (WTO) has approved the U.S. to impose tariffs on $7.5 billion of European goods.



Already reeling for the ruinous run of global financial data.



Asian markets are now left dealing with the damaging effect of trade wars on three front. The US-China, US-EU and Korea and Japan.With the global economic data continuing to deteriorate this new trade war front will stoke the recessionary fears to no end.



The fact the U.S. didn't bother even to review the damaging economic implications suggests the U.S. administration is content to wantonly escalate their brand of scorched-earth trade policies and hardly indicates that President Trump is in a jovial or negotiating mood.



Even in light of the sentiment damaging weaker run of U.S. economic data, there is not backing off while perhaps believing that his election ambitions lie in an active trade war charge rather than setting a perimeter defensive line



Personally given the timing and with the market already shifting to recessionary doom and gloom, I don’t think this has been well-thought-out at all which is pretty typical of Trump administration trade initiatives



Malaysia



The Ringgit remains glued to 4.19, but this belies the fact the local markets have a lot to digest



A GST proposal by a domestic think tank is garnering lots of press



The Dr M vs Anwar succession talk move on in events



However, with the 2020 Budget getting delivered on Oct 11, this is now being viewed as the next significant catalyst with is likely keeping investors caution on local bonds, equities and currency



India



The RBI's rate decision is due on Friday. Market consensus is for a 25bp rate cut to 5.15%



However, its all bout the Forward guidance Trader will be looking for any signs the RBI is taking solace recent corporate tax cuts which may lessen the likelihood of additions near term easing.



Indonesia



Indonesian President Jokowi is reportedly prioritising labour market reform, which may result in lighter severance payments.



Jokowi also appears to be reiterating his prior views to adjust investment rules and corporate taxes. This move could be viewed positively for Indo bonds and the IDR.



Thailand



The weakness in the Thai market is set to continue as risk-off sentiment continues to dampen investor appetite. Institutional investors are likely sellers in this toxic environment with local funds outflows accelerate.



The currency reaction has been mute possible due to a stable Yuan but focuses now shifts to the essential STI 1600 level

------------------------------ --------



Why the bounce in oil? Don’t read too much into early price action, especially in Asia possibly due to the China holiday effect



A reason why oil prices may be bouncing higher over and beyond the usual " profit-taking " diatribe



While trade optimism could keep a bullish impulse flickering the assumption that spare capacity is thought to be running dry in Saudi Arabia after they used up reserves to support export flows after the terrorist attack. This quasi supply argument does suggest that even a minor disruption can push prices higher.

Also, the MBS " put/straddle" that infers that Saudi Arabia will continue to offer support and resistance at oil price extremes provides a bit of a backstop



However, overall the market remains pretty toxic suggesting that until further notice oil traders could be better sellers on rallies
