Shiv Sena draws the short straw

Untitled Carousel MNS to leave field open for Aaditya in Worli Party sources say Raj doesn’t want to spoil his nephew’s chances.

political paradigm

Sena mouthpiece Saamana

Untitled Carousel Maharashtra Assembly Elections 2019: Nitesh Rane will contest from Kankavli seat on BJP ticket, claims Narayan Rane Former Maharashtra chief minister Narayan Rane on Wednesday said his son Nitesh Rane will contest the upcoming state Assembly polls from Kankavli seat on BJP's ticket.

Aaditya Thackeray

The ruling party prevails, completely unseats Sena from Pune, Navi Mumbai, Nagpur and Nashik.By agreeing to 124 seats in the seat-sharing negotiations with ally BJP for the upcoming assembly polls, the Shiv Sena has seemingly accepted that it is no longer the big brother in state politics.With 164 seats, the BJP not only has the lion’s share, but it has also managed to unseat the Uddhav Thackeray-led party from four key zones - Pune, Navi Mumbai, Nagpur and Nashik. The Sena has drawn a blank when it comes to the 20 seats these cities represent. So, outside of Mumbai and Thane, it will have hardly any significant presence. Of the 36 seats in Mumbai, the Sena will fight 19, while the BJP has 17. In Thane, Sena’s tally is 3 against BJP’s one.In their seat-sharing pact, apart from the 164-124 bifurcation, the two frenemies have also agreed on a few terms. The Sena says it has been promised two additional seats on the legislative council from the BJP’s quota, and that the BJP will accommodate other allies including the Republican Party of India and the Rashtriya Samaj Paksha in its own quota.The BJP, however, has made it clear that it will not share the chief minister’s post nor will the Sena be given the deputy chief minister’s post.Even as political observers scrutinise this marked shift in Maharashtra’s, in an editorial on Wednesday, defended the ‘compromise’.“There is always give and take in an alliance. We have to accept that the Sena is giving more than it is getting in return this time. But we are determined to achieve 100 per cent success in whatever we have got,” said the editorial.The Sena and the BJP have shared a love-hate relationship for over three decades, and until the Lok Sabha elections in May that saw the ruling disposition retain power with a massive mandate, the Uddhav-led party has always had an undisputed upper hand, offering the BJP anywhere between 105 and 119 seats over the years.Political analysts believe that the Sena is extra cautious this time around as it does not want a repeat of 2014 when it chose to go it alone after seat-sharing talks failed with the BJP.“This is a clear role reversal. In 2014, the Sena wanted to contest 151 of the 288 seats, leaving only 119 for the BJP and its allies. The BJP tried to bargain hard since it was riding the Modi wave, but instead of giving in, Sena stood its ground. The result was that BJP won 122 seats while the Sena managed a measly 63,” a political observer told Mirror.For the Sena, the decision was a ‘practical’ one.“Uddhavji did not want to take the risk of being isolated especially when the BJP is riding a Modi wave and a Hindutva wave too. There is no possibility of an alliance with Congress-NCP since they are in no position to come back to power. He has taken a pragmatic decision, one we missed in 2014,” a functionary said.Party insiders are also of the view that with’s electoral debut, the alliance was especially significant to ensure that he won with a big margin, thus establishing him as the party’s face. The party has already pitched him as their chief ministerial candidate.Additionally, Sena is also grappling with threats of resignations and rebellion from those who did not figure in its candidates' list.Despite this, all is not lost, said another senior Sena functionary. “If we improve our strike rate and win over 100 seats, we can bargain hard for the CM’s and the deputy CM’s post. We just have to cross the 100-seat mark,” he said.
