Aaditya Thackeray's net worth Rs 16 crore, owns BMW car, has no criminal cases

Aaditya is the first member of the Thackeray family to contest an election (Photo: Danesh Jassawala)

Shiv Sena youth president Aaditya Thackeray is worth a little over Rs 16 crore, according to an affidavit submitted by him. Aaditya Thackeray has movable assets worth Rs 11.38 crore and immovable assets worth Rs 4.67 crore.

Aaditya owns a BMW car presently worth Rs 6.5 lakh and does not have any criminal cases against him. All this information was revealed by Aaditya Thackeray in his poll affidavit that his submitted while filing nomination papers for the upcoming Maharashtra assembly election.

The 29-year-old Aaditya is the grandson of stalwart Bal Thackeray and is the first member of the Thackeray family to contest an election. Aaditya will fight the Maharashtra assembly election from Worli, a Shiv Sena bastion.

MOVABLE ASSETS

According to his affidavit, Aadtiya Thackeray has Rs 13,344 cash in hand while a sum of Rs 10.36 crore lies in various banks and other financial institutions in the form of various deposits. Aaditya has also invested Rs 20.39 lakh in bonds, debentures, share market and mutual funds.

Aaditya owns just one vehicle -- a BMW car that was bought this year and is currently valued at Rs 6.5 lakh. The car is a second-hand purchase since it was first registered in 2010. Aadtiya also owns Rs 64.65 lakh worth of gold, jewellery and other valuables.

IMMOVABLE ASSETS

In immovable property, Aaditya Thackeray owns five agricultural plots in Maharashtra's Raigad district. All the plots were "gifted" by his father and have a combined current market value of Rs 77.66 lakh.

Aaditya also owns two commercial buildings in the Thane district. Both the buildings were "gifted" to him by his mother and are currently valued at Rs 3.89 crore.

According to the affidavit, Aaditya Thackeray is a Bachelor of Arts from Mumbai's St. Xavier Colleg and a Bachelor of Laws from the KC Law College. Aadtiya does not have any loans or any other liabilities and his primary sources of income are interest, rent, share of profit from firm and dividend.

(This story has been updated with details of Aadtiya Thackeray's immovable assets)
