Editorial: Realigning foreign aid makes a lot of sense

This advertisement has not loaded yet, but your article continues below.

Editorial: Realigning foreign aid makes a lot of sense Pakistan Prime Minister Imran Khan recently made provocative remarks at the United Nations, which bordered on threats of commencing a nuclear war against India. Photo by Sebastien St. Jean / AFP / Getty Images

Article content Pakistan Prime Minister Imran Khan recently made provocative remarks at the United Nations, which bordered on threats of commencing a nuclear war against India.

Advertisement Story continues below This advertisement has not loaded yet, but your article continues below.

Article content The country has previously been accused by many observers of being a state sponsor of terror. Yet Canadian taxpayers shell over money to the Pakistan government each year. We apologize, but this video has failed to load.

tap here to see other videos from our team. Try refreshing your browser, or Editorial: Realigning foreign aid makes a lot of sense Back to video In 2018, Canada’s international assistance to Pakistan was to the tune of $71 million. This is the country that seeks to enforce a hard line interpretation of Islam through its laws. Sun columnists Tarek Fatah and Farzana Hassan have long cautioned Canadians about the extreme elements that have taken root in Pakistan. Last year, the Pakistan government even notified Twitter that a post made several years ago by Sun columnist Anthony Furey contravened their blasphemy laws, ones that come with the death penalty. Is this the sort of country we want to be offering Canadians’ hard-earned tax dollars? Absolutely not. Yet you hardly hear any questions about the over $6 billion the federal government doles out annually to countries all around the world.

Advertisement Story continues below This advertisement has not loaded yet, but your article continues below.

Article content We apologize, but this video has failed to load.

tap here to see other videos from our team. Try refreshing your browser, or Conservative Leader Andrew Scheer is changing that. He’s proposed to reduce the foreign aid budget by 25% and re-align our priorities so the money is only going to poor countries that actually need our help. It’s a wise idea. The foreign aid system is in need of a shakeup and definitely greater scrutiny. While Canadians will disagree on specific funding projects and exactly which countries are deserving of our money, Scheer is right to push the conversation. People’s Party of Canada leader Maxime Bernier had previously promised something similar, to eliminate all foreign aid except for emergency assistance. There are so many segments of Canadian society that could certainly do with a greater cash infusion. Whether it’s public transit, veterans or First Nations communities – it’s not hard to find things to spend money on in Canada that most people would agree are worthy of our support. Yet while these priorities continue to lack funding, the feds have been sending money to countries like Russia, China and North Korea. It’s time for a change. Realigning our foreign aid funding levels and priorities only makes sense.

Share this article in your social network

Advertisement Story continues below This advertisement has not loaded yet, but your article continues below.

Latest National Stories Advertisement Story continues below This advertisement has not loaded yet, but your article continues below.

LFP Noon News Roundup Sign up to receive a curated collection of links and highlights from our award-winning breaking news coverage, in-depth analysis and unmatched investigative features at lunchtime weekdays. Email Address There was an error, please provide a valid email address. Sign Up By clicking on the sign up button you consent to receive the above newsletter from Postmedia Network Inc. You may unsubscribe any time by clicking on the unsubscribe link at the bottom of our emails. Postmedia Network Inc. | 365 Bloor Street East, Toronto, Ontario, M4W 3L4 | 416-383-2300 Thanks for signing up! A welcome email is on its way. If you don't see it, please check your junk folder. The next issue of LFP Noon News Roundup will soon be in your inbox. We encountered an issue signing you up. Please try again
