Sanjay Nirupam takes on Sonia Gandhi loyalists, threatens to quit ahead of Maharashtra poll

In more trouble for the Maharashtra unit of the Congress, former Mumbai unit chief Sanjay Nirupam has slammed the party brass saying they are unaware of the ground reality.

Threatening to resign from the party ahead of the Maharashtra assembly election, Sanjay Nirupam said, "The leaders in Delhi are unaware of the ground reality. The brass is totally disconnected as they stay away from campaigning. There is also no mechanism to take feedback from the party workers on the ground."

Sanjay Nirupam, Congress: I don't think I would want to leave the party but if the things within the party continues to be like this, then I don't think I can be in the party for long. I will not take part in election campaign. #MaharashtraAssemblyPolls pic.twitter.com/qnNavH7kw1 ANI (@ANI) October 4, 2019

With the feud in Congress out in the open after his tweet on Thursday, former Big Boss contestant Sanjay Nirupam alleged that Congress loyalists were being sidelined and claimed that this was part of a conspiracy against former party chief Rahul Gandhi.

"I wanted a candidate to be given nomination from Versova. Yet, it wasn't accepted. This shows that all those associated with Rahul Gandhi are being systematically finished. Those sitting at the helm are biased. They only want to finish others," Sanjay Nirupam said.

Addressing a press conference, Sanjay Nirupam also alleged that around 20 of promising candidates were not given a ticket by the Congress. "Sonia [Gandhi] is given wrong information by some lobby of sycophants. I have spoken to top leaders about my apprehension but despite that nothing has been done and I see no point in doing it again," Sanjay Nirupam said.

The former Mumbai Congress chief also threatened to resign if he wasn’t heard. "I don't think I would want to leave the party but if the things within the party continue to be like this, then I don't think I can be in the party for long. I will not take part in the election campaign," he said.

Won't campaign: Sanjay Nirupam

Fissures in the Mumbai Congress over the ticket distribution for the Maharashtra Assembly polls were out in the open after its former chief Sanjay Nirupam on Thursday declared that he will not take part in the party's campaign.

The former MP also said the way the party's leadership was behaving with him the time to say good bye to the party was "not far away".

It seems Congress Party doesn’t want my services anymore. I had recommended just one name in Mumbai for Assembly election. Heard that even that has been rejected.

As I had told the leadership earlier,in that case I will not participate in poll campaign.

Its my final decision. Sanjay Nirupam (@sanjaynirupam) October 3, 2019

"It seems Congress Party doesn't want my services anymore. I had recommended just one name in Mumbai for assembly election. Heard that even that has been rejected. As I had told the leadership earlier, in that case I will not participate in poll campaign. It's my final decision," Nirupam had tweeted.

Nirupam was replaced as the city Congress chief ahead of the Lok Sabha polls in March this year following complaints by a section of party leaders that he functioned in "unilateral" manner.

Also read | Milind Deora is nikamma, says Sanjay Nirupam as Maharashtra Congress rift widens

Also watch | Will not participate in poll campaign: Congress leader Sanjay Nirupam


