Pak defence min threatens to unleash nukes against India

Photo Credit: Indiatimes

HIGHLIGHTS

Pak defence minister in an interview said that Islamabad is open to using tactical devices

Asif 's latest salvo comes soon after the Uri terror attack

Asif has made threatening references before to the option of nuclear strikes against India

Islamabad is open to using tactical devices — a reference to tactical nuclear weapons that Pakistan is believed to possess — against India if it feels its safety is threatened, Pakistani defence minister Khawaja Muhammad Asif said in an interview to a Pakistani channel.

"Tactical weapons joh hain, joh hamne yeh progammes develop kiya hua hai, yeh apne hifazat ke liye develop kiya hua hai. Hamne devices jo hain just as showpieces toh nahin rakhe hue. Lekin agar hamare salamati ko khatra hua, toh hum nestanabhut kar denge unko (Tactical weapons, our programmes that we have developed, they have been developed for our protection. We haven't kept the devices that we have just as showpieces. But if our safety is threatened, we will annihilate them (India)," Asif said in the interview, telecast on September 26. He had made a similar comment on another Pakistani channel on September 17, a day before the terrorist attack in Uri.

Asif's latest salvo comes soon after the Indian Army's brigade headquarters in Uri, Jammu & Kashmir, was attacked by terrorists on September 18, resulting in the deaths of 18 soldiers. The four attackers were also killed.

India has since handed over evidence to Pakistani high commissioner Abdul Basit that the terrorists were from Pakistan-occupied Kashmir. Pakistan defence minister Khawaja Muhammad Asif has made threatening references before to the option of nuclear strikes against India. The statements, emanating from the minister, are an alarming reminder of Pakistan's position on the use of nuclear weapons.

In an interview with the Pakistani channel on September 17, when asked if he thought there was a threat of war, Asif answered, "I don't think there is any such threat but as Allah has said in the Quran, `The horses must be prepared', so we should always be completely prepared. There is also a fa mous English proverb, 'The price of freedom is eternal vigilance'... We are always pressurised (sic) time and again... that we have more tactical weapons than we need. It is internationally recognised that we have a superiority , and if there is a threat to our security, or if anyone steps on our soil and if someone's designs are a threat to our security , we will not hesitate to use those weapons for our defence."

Asked if Pakistan could use atomic weapons in case of a war with India, he had replied, "This depends on the situation...but if our defence and survival is (sic) in danger, then we should use everything. What is there to fear?"
