Will show rebels their place in two days: CM

Fadnavis says BJP-Sena will return to power, rebellion or no rebellion

The saffron alliance of the Bharatiya Janata Party (BJP) and the Shiv Sena has sounded a warning note for the angry leaders mounting a rebellion against the party after being denied a ticket for the Assembly elections.

The allies will deploy “all means” to tackle the rebels, including reaching out to them, failing which they will take the strictest action possible over the next two days, Chief Minister Devendra Fadnavis and Sena chief Uddhav Thackeray said in a joint statement on Friday.

“We will first try to call and speak to them, but if that does not work out and people still want to rebel, the saffron alliance would show them their place. Not only will they be thrown out of the party, there will never ever be any space for them in the Mahayuti,” Mr. Fadnavis warned. He also assured party workers that any rebellion would be quelled.

Mr. Fadnavis said it is not correct to say that those who have not got a ticket have been dumped. He said the responsibilities in the party keep shifting and those without tickets may find new assignments in the party in future. “The party has no fear of the ongoing rebellion, if there is any at all. We will sit and talk to those candidates who have not got a ticket. We understand they might be a bit emotional at this point, but soon they will understand the larger picture,” he said.

Mr. Thackeray said the context in which the alliance has been stitched is different from the Lok Sabha elections. He even played down the speculation about his son, Yuva Sena chief Aaditya Thackeray, taking on the role of deputy chief minister.

“There is no question of a big brother, younger brother in this alliance. We have managed to keep the brotherhood alive which is very important. Aaditya is just taking the first steps in active politics, and it is not correct to say what his next step should be, even as his dream is to see Maharashtra progress,” Mr. Thackeray said when asked for his views.

The allies are facing heat from angry members, including current and former ministers, who were denied tickets. Protests broke out in Ghatkopar, where former housing minister Prakash Mehta was not given a ticket, while Navi Mumbai and Latur witnessed protests by Sena workers against seats allotted to BJP candidates. The supporters of senior BJP leader Eknath Khadse, too, have protested against the party’s decision to not field him in Muktainagar.

Meanwhile, Mr. Fadnavis spelt out the seat-sharing pact, giving it a formal seal. “The formula is like this: 124 (+2 in Council) seats for Shiv Sena, 14 for allies, and the rest for the BJP,” he said, indicating the BJP will fight on 140 seats. “We will come back, rebellion or no rebellion, with a thumping margin and build a Maharashtra which will be drought-free over the next five years.”
