Fall in line, Tanwar, Nirupam told

editorial@tribune.com

Aditi Tandon

Tribune News Service

New Delhi, October 4

Faced with rebellion in election-bound Haryana and Maharashtra, the Congress today issued a stern warning to rebel leaders Ashok Tanwar and Sanjay Nirupam to restrain themselves or be ready for a future action.

Tanwar and Nirupam, both former chiefs of Haryana and Mumbai party units, respectively, have cast aspersions on the ticket distribution process and declared non-cooperation in campaigns.

Tanwar on Thursday resigned from all election committees and in his letter to Congress president Sonia Gandhi alleged sale of tickets in the state. Nirupam today alleged that leaders of Sonia Gandhi’s coterie are out to sideline former party chief Rahul Gandhi’s team members.

Silent ever since Tanwar addressed a gathering of his supporters outside Sonia’s residence two days ago in a signal of revolt, the Congress today said both Tanwar and Nirupam are “well advised to exercise restraint and introspect whom their actions will help.”

Congress spokesperson Manish Tewari hinted at potential future action against both Tanwar and Nirupam saying, “The advice of restraint obviously comes with a time stamp and what follows and what should follow is within the realm of leadership to make this decision.”

Dismissing Nirupam’s insinuations, Tewari said, “Sanjay Nirupam is anxious about one ticket not being given to his loyalist. This sometimes happens. Nirupam has been Mumbai chief and ex-MP. It would be good if he doesn’t kite fly these conspiracy theories because this serves no one’s purpose.”

The Congress also said leaders who are upset with ticket allocations must introspect over whether or not their actions are strengthening anti-Congress forces that have “wreaked havoc in India over the past five years.”

Post the show of factionalism in Haryana and Maharashtra, the Congress appears increasingly divided between Sonia-backed old guard and Rahul Gandhi’s loyalists with the latter either quitting since Sonia Gandhi took charge or rebelling bitterly.

Former Jharkhand state Congress Chief Ajoy Kumar resigned recently and in a letter to Sonia alleged that “worst criminals looked better than some Congress leaders.” He was Rahul’s pick.

Ex-Tripura Congress chief Pradyot Debbarman quit two weeks ago alleging corruption by AICC general secretary northeast Luizinho Faleiro in a letter to Sonia and that Congress was its own enemy.

All the revolting leaders were appointed by Rahul Gandhi whose exit appears to have left them in the lurch mirroring the “old versus young” chasm in the party.

show-cause notice to Rae Bareli MLA

Lucknow: Congress Legislature Party leader Ajay Kumar ‘Lallu’ on Friday issued a show-cause notice to Rae Bareli (Sadar) MLA Aditi Singh for attending the 36-hour special session of the UP Vidhan Sabha by defying the whip. In his letter Lallu said, “You whole-heartedly participated in the session against the party whip which is serious indiscipline and an anti-party activity... furnish your clarification within two days...” TNS

‘Coterie around Sonia sidelining us’

Except in three or four seats, party candidates will forfeit their deposits… a coterie around Sonia Gandhi is sidelining those who worked under former party president Rahul Gandhi. A conspiracy is being hatched in Delhi... —Sanjay Nirupam, Maha cong ex-chief

‘Advice comes with time stamp’

It is understandable that there are differences over ticket distribution and these two leaders are angry over it, but they should show maturity and sagacity. The advice of restraint obviously comes with a time stamp. —Manish Tewari, Cong spokesperson
