Bomb threat letters to HCs backfires, lands man in jail

harassed

Rajendra Singh

bomb threat

High Court of Karnataka

During questioning Rajendra (in pic) revealed that he wanted to take revenge against his father-in-law and his brother-in-law as they had harassed him over a family feud –Police officer

High Court police.

Frustrated after beingby his in-laws over a family feud, a 36-year-old private firm executive’s desire to teach them a lesson has landed him behind bars.Using his father-in-law’s name and address,sentletters to the High Courts of Karnataka, Tamil Nadu, West Bengal and Maharashtra. On September 17, the office of the Registrar General ofhad received a bomb threat letter in the name of one Hardarshan Singh with a Delhi address.In the letter, Rajendra (who was pretending to be Hardarshan) claimed that he is from a terror organisation. He further added that along with his son, he would carry out bomb blasts in various places within the High Court building. A complaint had been filed, in this regard, with the Vidhana Soudha police.“A team of police officers from the Central division was formed to probe the matter. The police officials then went to Hardarshan’s Delhi address and subjected him to questioning. During questioning Hardarshan suspected the involvement of his son-in-law, Rajendra Singh, behind the bomb threat letter. The police also obtained the details of Rajendra Singh’s whereabouts from his father-in-law,” said an officer, who was a part of the investigating team.Rajendra is a resident of Lalkurthi Bazaar in Uttar Pradesh. When the city police went in search of him to Uttar Pradesh, they found that he had already been arrested by the Chennai B-4The city police, after approaching the Chennai police, took Rajendra into custody after obtaining the court’s permission in Chennai.“During questioning Rajendra revealed that he wanted to take revenge against his father-in-law and his brother-in-law as they had harassed him over a family feud... , ” the officer added.
