Kavinder for early completion of all pending works - Jammu Kashmir Latest News

Excelsior Correspondent

JAMMU, Jan 3: Former Dy. Chief Minister & MLA Gandhi Nagar, Kavinder Gupta conducted an extensive tour of a number of rural areas of Gandhi Nagar Constituency. During this tour, Gupta also interacted with people and took stock of their day to day problems being faced by the inhabitants of the area. Gupta said many works related to lanes & drains and upgradation of roads has also been completed.

He said at the start, State Government had fixed a target to macadamise (top with tar) about 28,000 kms of road under PMGSY (Pradhan Mantri Gram Sadak Yojana) in the current financial year, including the roads to be taken up under other schemes, including CRF, NABARD, World Bank, ADB, State-sector and district-sector. “For pacing up execution of connectivity projects, the State Government had fixed timeline for tendering, allotment of contracts and other codal formalities, bracketing the whole process to 45 days,” he said. But on ground the works have been completed for 1263 KMs only”, he added.

Gupta said under this scheme the works worth Rs 16 crore were to be executed in Gandhi Nagar Constituency, but still some works in the rural helmets of the Constituency are pending. He said he will be taking up the matter with Governor, Satya Pal Malik, so that the pending works are completed within this fiscal year only. He said it is the priority of BJP to provide better infrastructure to the public as road connectivity is considered to be an important factor in changing the socio-economic condition of the citizens of any area. In developing nations like India, roads carry much more importance considering the vast population of the country still living in rural areas.

He said to reach out to the last home in a hamlet with a road, PMGSY was started in 2000 by then Prime Minister, Atal Behari Vajpayee and Modi Government at Centre provided Jammu and Kashmir a special package for the same.

Kavinder further added that some leaders of the opposition parties have unleashed false propaganda in the Constituency, but the people are well aware of the poll gimmick and will surely teach them a lesson in forthcoming elections. Gupta said his doors are always open for anyone who has any complaint or suggestion for the development of the area.
