Madhya Pradesh: Patwari Sangh calls off strike after apology from state minister

The strike by the Patwaris, which has been going on for the last three days, came to an end on Sunday after their demands were met.

The Madhya Pradesh Patwari Union called off the strike after meeting state Revenue Minister Govind Singh Rajput on Sunday.

While speaking to India Today, Madhya Pardesh Patwari Sangh leader Prakash Mali said, "We were called corrupt, but today the minister has officially apologised to the Patwari community. He had also tweeted earlier, but today, in view of the official apology and suffering of farmers, we have withdrawn the strike."

A dispute had erupted when Madhya Pradesh Higher Education Minister Jitu Patwari called people belonging to Patwari Sangh corrupt.

Even as Congress leader Digvijay Singh's controversial remark against Patwaris surfaced on Wednesday, the Patwari Sangh held a strike on October 3 and said that they will not end it till the ministers tender a public apology.

The Patwaris stalled the work altogether which reportedly had affected the compensation which was to be received after heavy rainfall in Madhya Pradesh.

However, seeing the matter escalating, state minister Jeetu Patwari apologised on Twitter which the Patwaris refused to accept. The Patwari Union was adamantly demanding a public apology, but after meeting with Govind Singh Rajput, they called off the strike.

According to a media report, the Patwari Union had demanded an increase in their pay-grade, which the state government said will be done in six months.

The strike was held during the time when survey was carried out in Madhya Pradesh to access the impact of rainfall.

Govind Singh Rajput had earlier appealed to Patwari Sangh to call off the strike since disbursement to the farmers, who experienced heavy loss due to incessant rains, was a priority for the state government, another media report said.

Meanwhile, Govind Singh Rajput said, "Today, I spoke to the Patwari Sangh and asked them to withdraw the strike in view of the natural calamity and in the interest of farmers. Therefore, they accepted my point and from today, the strike by the Patwaris has ended in Madhya Pradesh."
