3,000 buildings in Manjari built using ‘fake’ documents

Local activist has levelled allegations after obtaining info under RTI



In major violation of Supreme Court’s and Bombay High Court’s directive on illegal constructions, 3,000 buildings in Manjari Budruk located in Hadapsar have been found to have flouted construction norms and erected by obtaining fabricated, backdated (January 2, 2009) commencement certificate and building plans. Of these, 1,134 buildings were constructed on waste land. When Pune Metropolitan Region Development Authority (PMRDA) sent notices and decided to demolish the illegal structures, Bharatiya Janata Party (BJP) Member of Legislative Assembly (MLA) Yogesh Tilekar allegedly distributed property cards to all 1,134 home owners. As per SC order, waste land cannot be used for residential or commercial purpose; however, hoping to get some brownie points in the upcoming Assembly elections, the MLA apparently distributed the fake property documents signed by the sarpanch on behalf of the village development officer. After investigating the matter, Hadapsar police has submitted a detail report to PMRDA and issued notices to the deputy sarpanch and other people who were found to be involved in the alleged scam.



~~71469823~~

The fraud came to light when a city-based activist Ravi Barate procured the information and documents related to the matter under the Right to Information Act.



After multiple incidents of illegal building collapse, both the apex court and Bombay HC had ordered that illegal constructions be demolished instead of regularising them. In the wake of Pune witnessing two major incidents of illegal building collapse, the collector surveyed the district and prepared a list of 15,000 illegal constructions in PMRDA limits. As per HC order, the district administration carried out another survey and listed 16,450 buildings flouting norms. Of these, 7,000 buildings were illegal in the Haveli taluka itself. when HC asked PMRDA to demolish the illegal buildings under its jurisdiction, the commissioner of PMRDA issued more than 25,000 ‘stop work’ notices in May 2019. All these notices were issued to individuals, builders and developers in Haveli, Wagholi, Kesnand, Lonikand, Awhalwadi, Theur, Shirur, Sanaswadi, Shikrapur, Manjari Budruk and others. They were asked to approach PMRDA office and furnish details of the permission granted for construction and also issued notices to demolish illegal buildings. Even the revenue department issued notices to the people who had encroached and constructed illegal buildings on waste land (gairan land). If a land owner or developer desires to develop a land that comes under PMRDA jurisdiction, he/she has to fulfil 42 terms and conditions and obtain no-objection certificate (NOC) from various government authorities as per Regional and Town Planning Act and Real Estate (Regulation and Development) Act.



All these projects have been constructed on a land that has survey numbers, and the gram panchayat has no authority to give any permission to such a land, as it comes under the jurisdiction of PMRDA. In January 2009, the revenue department had warned all village heads and village development officers (VDOs) that they have no authority vested by the government to sanction building plans. Only collectors have such rights and power.



The revenue officer also warned that if any such cases were spotted, criminal action will be taken by government. However, the documents received under RTI revealed that in Manjari village, deputy sarpanch Purushottam Dharwadkar and other members allegedly issued backdated commencement certificates. He and his wife Pooja own a construction firm that was formed in 2018, but they have also issued commencement certificate in January 2009.



When Barate filed a complaint with Hadapsar police, highlighting the illegal constructions, the village development officer informed that the commencement certificates are fabricated and not sanctioned or issued by Manjari Budruk panchayat because 97 per cent of the land falls under survey numbers.



The activist filed complaints with various authorities, including Hadapsar police, Real Estate Regulatory Authority (RERA), PMRDA, income tax, anti-corruption and environment departments. He has demanded that action be initiated against Dharwadkar, politicians and owners of the development firms, Pramod Kodre, Pradip Kodre, Archana Kodre, Kaliadas Bhirade and Vaishali Bhorade, who are allegedly involved in fabricating letterheads and seals of Manjari gram panchayat.



Speaking to Mirror, Barate said, “After receiving notices from the revenue department, the developers from Majari Budruk and Shirur met MLAs Tilekar and Baburao Pacharne. They requested the MLAs to ask the Chief Minister to order the chairman of PMRDA to withdraw the ‘stop work’ notices. What is shocking is that, the CM, who is the chairperson of PMRDA and the minister of urban development department, passed an order to withdraw the ‘stop work’ notices.”



When Mirror contacted Dharwadkar, he said “Between 2007 to 2012, I was acting as sarpanch and in 2009 I had stopped issuing such permissions. Even I am not aware who are involved in the scam and made my forged signatures. I have lodged a complaint regarding the same.”



When Mirror spoke to MLA Tilekar, he refused to speak on the matter, only saying, “This is the job of people and they will decide what is legal and illegal.”


