Supreme Court To Hear Aarey Colony Case, Sex Racket Busted in Ghaziabad & Other Top Stories

New Delhi:

With Five Days Remaining, India Yet To Get Official Word On Xi Jinping’s Visit: Report

With five days remaining, China has given no official word on President Xi Jinping’s informal summit with Prime Minister Narendra Modi in Chennai on October 11-12. The next 24 to 48 hours are key to the announcement of the visit, sources said. The meeting marks the completion of 70 years of diplomatic relations between India and China. Read more…

PDP Leaders Not To Meet Mehbooba Mufti Today, Composition Of Delegation Yet To Be Finalised

The Peoples Democratic Party (PDP) leaders have deferred the meeting with detained party chief Mehbooba Mufti in Srinagar. The delegation was granted permission by the Jammu and Kashmir government on a day when 15-member National Conference (NC) delegation met party president Farooq Abdullah and former chief minister Omar Abdullah for the first time since they were put in detention two months ago. Read more…

Supreme Court Special Bench To Hear Aarey Colony Case Today, Protesters Get Bail

Taking suo moto cognisance of cutting of tree in Maharashtra's Aarey Colony, the Supreme Court has decided to hold an urgent hearing on Monday.The top court has constituted a special bench for an urgent hearing on Monday against the felling of trees in the Aarey forest in Maharashtra. Read more…

Ghaziabad: Prostitution Racket Busted After Raids On Spa Centres, 19 Arrested

Nineteen people, including nine women, were arrested in connection with an alleged prostitution racket from three spas. The woman kingpin of the racket was also arrested during the raid. All three centres were using WhatsApp for soliciting customers by sending photographs of the women, Assistant Superintendent of Police Keshav Kumar said. The sub-divisional magistrate of the city was also present during raid. Read more…

Petrol, Diesel Prices Today: Fuel Prices Fall For 5th Day

The price of petrol and diesel prices came down for the fifth straight day on Monday, October 7. On Monday, the petrol rate decreased by 12-13 paise while diesel rate also decreased by 12 to 13 paise in India today. Petrol and diesel prices have been falling down for the last five days after more than two weeks of upward movement that started after a drone attack on Saudi Arabia’s crude oil processing facilities on September 14. Read more…

For all the Latest India News, Download News Nation Android and iOS Mobile Apps.
