Buzz around Priyanka Gandhi grows in Congress and outside

Buzz around Priyanka Gandhi grows in Congress and outside

The buzz around Priyanka Gandhi's re-emergence after five years to give a push to Congress prospects in eastern U.P. is growing. She has been written about in print media and spoken about in electronic media after she was made general secretary of the AICC for east U.P. But as weeks go by, will she be asked to go beyond Uttar Pradesh? That she is savvy and has a style and ability to win over people goes without saying.

Once the Election Code kicks off in the next few weeks for the Lok Sabha polls, it is possible that the Akhilesh Yadav-led Samajwadi Party and Mayawati-led BSP could reconsider their stated position of staying at arm's length from the Congress. Could Priyanka Gandhi have a role to play in building up and cementing bonds with Opposition parties around the country and give a lending hand to her mother, Sonia Gandhi, and brother, Rahul Gandhi?

All parties need people with capabilities to push the yoke or the plough on the ground. Just now and this time round she has been made the AICC general secretary for the politically sensitive and important region from where her great grandfather, Jawaharlal Nehru, Mrs. Indira Gandhi and later her parents and brother have entered the Lok Sabha. Whether she will contest from her mother's constituency or take up some other seat remains to be seen. The prospects of her getting into the Lower House of Parliament within three months cannot be ruled out.

She has tested the eastern U.P.'s political waters by managing her mother, Sonia Gandhi's election and her brother, Rahul Gandhi's, in the last General Election and made an impact on the voters. There is no doubt that she is articulate and forceful in her speeches and in response to questions thrown at her. She does not shy away from political battles. Her striking resemblance to her grandmother, Mrs. Indira Gandhi, and similar style of dressing lends an aura to her.

She exudes confidence and is known to be a quick thinker. She gels with her audience at public meetings as well as roadside interactions with voters. She is fluent in Hindi, with a pithy expression thrown in her replies or statements. She is at ease with interviews with media persons in English and Hindi. One of her best interviews was with Barkha Dutt for NDTV almost a decade ago and she carried it off for a hour or so, without batting an eyelid.

She is not a novice in the political arena though she has yet to contest her first election. Public life runs in her veins and blood, but she has been keeping a low profile because she wanted time to bring up her children. Now that she can afford to take time off from family chores, she is ready to jump into the fray.

Her brother Rahul Gandhi is now the Congress President and since winning three elections in legislatures of Rajasthan, Madhya Pradesh and Chhattisgarh, he thought he could do with help from a wider circle in large parts of the country. Even though for the time being, Priyanka Gandhi has been given charge of eastern U.P., the Congress might wish to utilize her services on a wider scale as time goes by.

Some of the snide remarks being made by some BJP people would appear to be uncalled for as decent conduct is expected; it reveals lack of sensitivity on their part. But such comments add to the importance of the person being targeted unnecessarily. Yet one retiring BJP member of the Lok Sabha from Haryana, Mr. Ashwini Kumar Chopra, who is not contesting the coming elections this year, has taken a positive attitude on Priyanka Gandhi's arrival on the political scene; he was a former neighbour of hers in New Delhi's Lodi Estate. It appears that he is parting ways with the BJP.

For the present, the Akhilesh-Mayawati alliance has planned to leave only two seats for the Congress: Amethi and Rae Bareli. But as time slips, will they reconsider their limitations and not assess the positive factors flowing from the Priyanka Gandhi arrival on the political scene. They will not, and have not, yet talked of the Gandhi family scion, Priyanka. All that matters may be how they could use the good offices of Ms. Gandhi.

In this scenario, Union Minister Nitin Gadkari is becoming a sort of maverick, if not a lone wolf. He is attacking the political class and says that leaders who sell dreams to the people, but do not deliver get "beaten up by the public politically". Yet he claimed that he is a doer and delivers on his own promises "100 per cent on what I talk about".

He is the National Highways Minister and holds charge of cleaning up of the river Ganga. In Maharashtra as PWD Minister, "I was ridiculed and I proved them wrong when I completed every project I had promised". Last month, he said in Pune that leaders should own up defeat and failures, though he did not elaborate, nor did he name any party or leaders.

Lalit Sethi is a Journalist of long standing and a commentator on Political and Social Issues.

—[IFS]
