Musharraf warns India: Don't forget Pakistan downed two IAF jets, caught Abhinandan

Former Pakistan president Pervez Musharraf speaks to journalists in Hong Kong, September 15, 2010. REUTERS/Bobby Yip/Files

DUBAI/ISLAMABAD: Pakistan's former military ruler General (Retd) Pervez Musharraf has warned New Delhi after Prime Minister Narendra Modi's threats that it should not forget how Islamabad had downed two of its jets and caught Indian Air Force (IAF) pilot, Wing Commander Abhinandan.

Musharraf, the All Pakistan Muslim League (APML) chief who, just two days ago, had expressed his intention to reenter Pakistan's politics and revive his political party, cautioned India from any aggression and said it should remember that the Pakistan Army was "not wearing bangles".



"We stand strong with our Kashmiri brethren and if need be, we will fight till the last drop of blood in our body is shed," he said, while addressing his party workers via a telephonic call on the APML's ninth foundation day.

The former president said Modi was threatening Pakistan. "Has India forgotten the Kargil war? At the time of the Kargil war, India sent its ambassador to the United States to ask them to stop Pakistan.

"India should full well remember that we downed two Indian jets and caught one of their pilots!"

Musharraf explained that the Indian PM should understand the world did not work through divisions but that "we should all live together peacefully".



The former military ruler spoke of how India had forcefully introduced a new system of law and imposed a curfew in Kashmir. "I want to tell them that we will fight till the last drop of blood in our body is shed," he said, talking about how tensions between New Delhi and Islamabad had heightened after India revoked occupied Kashmir's special status on August 5.

Separately, Musharraf also addressed talks about his health, saying he was aware that there were many rumours spreading about him. "I was unwell, it was a sickness that couldn't be diagnosed.

"When I went to Britain and got medical treatment, then I got to know about my disease. It affects one person in every three million people.

"Now, I'm being treated in Dubai," he said.

Read more:




