One’s Success Is Better Than Many Failures, NDA Plays ‘one’ Card To Shift Focus

Home >> Delhi One’s Success Is Better Than Many Failures, NDA Plays ‘one’ Card To Shift Focus

Today’s politics in India is fraught with people who volunteer themselves to be either secular saints or show up as harbingers of the national conscience or they are the only torch bearers of political good sense.

By D N Singh

Everywhere there is a restive situation. Whether at the fronts where we face the scourge of the enemy or inside the country, the raging debates on ‘economic slowdown’ or a feeling of urgency among the people that, narratives are dwarfing the cause of larger welfare for people.

For whatever reason, sloganeering of new types and their propagation and publicity , the trend leaves little doubt that, willingly or otherwise, there is a subtle attempt at disguising real delivery in the garb of such diversions.

‘One nation, one language’, ‘one nation, one I card’, ‘one nation, one voice’ ….in fact, it can in the near future goes on and on to extend itself .

Lightly speaking, it can be tomorrow anything that fits into the convenience of a dispensation regardless of the collective choice of the people. May be, it is not far when it can be, One Nation, one religion, or one nation one political party or one man, and nobody else, one nation, one thought, one nation, one bank, such paradigmatic shifts cannot be ruled out.

Recently, in a musical reality show, to be on air shortly, a fresh coinage reads ‘one nation, one voice’. Which has a subtle undertone to pander to a specific vanity.

It has been a long journey for the common man walking through the tracks which began few years ago when the Voter I card was upheld to be the mandatory and most sacrosanct proof of one’s identity as a citizen.

Then it was the introduction of Adhaar card, which was made compulsory like legal diktat subsequently to become a rule in the midst of wide contrarian views.

Like Frankenstein’s monster, the ghost of Adhaar has been made the mandate one has to abide by from the cradle to the grave.

The seers in politics do not know the hardships the majority face in their pursuit for this thing called Adhaar now revered as the end card of a life . To get an Adhaar card for a child of five or six years , the man or woman at the designated window asks for a Id proof for the child even if you produce the date of birth proof and the child itself and yourself (parents).

The officer with all her or his vanity in eyes, quickly suggests to get the child’s identity attested by a gazetted rank officer. It is not hard to imagine how the couple would manage such an attestation from an officer!

One can imagine the tropic impacts of such negative external stimulus in addition to the sceptical queries from the officer and one’s physical and mental fatigue of frequenting the Adhaar centre and waiting for hours.

Today’s politics in India is fraught with people who volunteer themselves to be either secular saints or show up as harbingers of the national conscience or they are the only torch bearers of political good sense.
