March towards LOC

Thousand of Kashmiries from different cities and towns have started theirs March towards the Line of Control (LOC) on call of Jammu Kashmir Liberation Front to express their anguish and indignation against the revocation of special constitutional status of occupied Kashmir and continued blockade of civilians. The government of Azad Kashmir has made administrative arrangements to stop the marchers 10 kilometers at Chinari behind this line. The Prime Minister Imran Khan has warned against crossing the LOC as described it to an attempt to strengthen the hands of India.

India has not been successful to quell the Intifada of Kashmiri Muslims that they had started in 1989. Since then successive Indian governments blamed Pakistan for sending militant groups into occupied Kashmir. A number of false flag operations were conducted to buttress this narrative against Pakistan. A few days back India has released a promotional video of the Indian Air force planes strike in Balkot which they claim to have targeted a training camp of militants. This can be a prelude to another false flag operation which India may be planning.

Pressure of the international community is building up against India to end curfew and lockdown in the occupied Kashmir and restore all communication links there. A US Senate panel has attached an amendment to the Foreign Appropriation Act 2020 which was moved in the Senate Appropriation Committee. This legislative move indicates the changing mood of US lawmakers about the human rights violations and atrocities perpetrated on Kashmiries. It merits mention that Washington Post reported the other day that a Democrat Senator Chris Van Hollen was denied entry into occupied Kashmir. The Senator has expressed concern over the worst human rights situation in the Indian Held Kashmir. Let us hope that the leadership of Jammu and Kashmir Liberation Front will be able to control the emotionally charged participants of LOC March and refrain from any unwise attempt to provide a pretext to India for a false flag operation or military adventurism in Azad Kashmir about which the Indian Army Chief has already issued a threat. The diplomatic gains achieved against India so far should not be undone.
