Maharashtra Assembly polls: Rebels give Sena-BJP a Maha dare

Efforts by the BJP and Shiv Sena to pacify rebel candidates failed to yield much results with many of them remaining in the fray as the time period for the withdrawal of nominations ended on Monday. With the rebellion spread across the length and breadth of the state, it's to be seen whether the saffron alliance will make it to its dream 220-plus target this Assembly election.



The rebel menace is mainly in Vidarbha, North Maharashtra and Kokan regions, with the allies largely succeeding in placating dissidents in Mumbai, Thane and Marathwada, barring a few exceptions. Chief Minister Devendra Fadnavis had on October 4 warned that rebels will have no place in the MahaYuti (grand alliance) led by BJP. Fadnavis, along with state BJP president Chandrakant Patil, party strategist Bhupen Yadav, and organisation secretary Vijay Puranik, had taken special interest to calm down rebels to avert a poll setback. On its part, Shiv Sena president Uddhav Thackeray, senior minister Subhash Desai and party leader Milind Narvekar had opened up communication with rebels.



In the Konkan region, BJP and Shiv Sena, despite alliance, face a tough challenge as rebels could turn spoilsport. In Kankavali constituency, BJP nominee Nitesh Rane has been challenged by rebel Sena activist Satish Sawant, who recently deserted Maharashtra Swabhiman Paksha floated by Rane's father and former chief minister Narayan Rane. Nitish, last week, had joined BJP after leaving the Congress.



In Sawantwadi constituency, Shiv Sena nominee and MoS (Home) Deepak Kesarkar will have to strive to retain his seat.

Here, BJP rebel Rajan Teli has not withdrawn his nomination. BJP is annoyed as the seat has been retained by Shiv Sena.

GREY AREAS The saffron alliance is facing rebel menace mainly in Vidarbha, North Maharashtra and Kokan regions

It has largely succeeding in placating rebels in Mumbai, Thane & Marathwada, barring a few exceptions

In the adjoining Kudal Malvan seat, Shiv Sena legislator Vaibhav Naik, who had defeated Narayan Rane in 2014 assembly election, will have to take on the Sindhudurg zilla parishad vice-president Ranjit Desai.



Union minister Nitin Gadkari's close confidant and BJP leader Mahesh Baldi has not withdrawn from Uran seat in Raigad district against Shiv Sena nominee Manohar Bhoir.



In Ramtek constituency, it is an acid test for BJP legislator Mallikarjun Reddy to retain his seat as Shiv Sena rebel Ashish Jaiswal is in the fray. In Hinganghar Devali, Sena rebel Ashok Shinde has not withdrawn his nomination.



In Solapur City Central, Shiv Sena nominee Dilip Mane's candidature has been challenged by party district chief Mahesh Kothe, while in Pandharpur former legislator Sudhakar Paricharak, who is contesting on the ticket from Rayant Kranti floated by MoS (Agriculture) Sadabhau Khot, received a much-needed relief after Sena rebel Sheila Godse withdrew her nomination.



In Versova, where BJP ally Shiv Sangram nominee Bharati Lavekar, who is contesting on BJP symbol, will have to struggle for re-election has Shiv Sena rebel Rajul Patel and BJP rebel Murji Patel have not withdrawn from fray despite repeated efforts by Shiv Sena and BJP.



In Mira Bhayander, BJP legislator Narendra Mehta is pitted against the BJP rebel and former mayor Gita Jain.


