Telangana sacks 48K protesting roadways staff

editorial@tribune.com

Tribune News Service

Hyderabad, October 7

The impasse between striking employees of Telangana State Road Transport Corporation (TSRTC) and the Telangana Government continues as the indefinite strike entered the third day, forcing commuters to abandon their travel plans.

All TSRTC buses are off roads even though the government has ordered sacking of around 48,000 employees and ordered fresh recruitment.

Chief Minister K Chandrashekhar Rao (KCR) has issued a warning to employees to resume normal work by Saturday evening or face the axe. The government has declared that it has only 1,200 employees left in TSRTC while the services of the remaining who have been on strike since Friday are no longer required.

The TSRTC employees went on strike to press for implementation of 26 demands, including the merger of TSRTC with the government. KCR, as Rao is popularly known, not only ruled out merger, but also refused to hold any talks with the striking employees.

A majority of the fleet of 10,500 buses of TSRTC has not been operational since Friday causing severe inconvenience to commuters. The Chief Minister has asked officials to recruit new employees and hire more private buses to lessen the hardship of commuters.

Following the CM’s orders to deal with the striking employees firmly, the police arrested many senior TSRTC leaders when they reached Telangana Martyrs’ Memorial near State Assembly to highlight their demands. Joint Action Committee (JAC) leader Ashwathama Reddy said they were adamant to continue the strike and would not be pressurised by the government.

Various trade bodies of the TSRTC have announced that they will challenge the government’s decision to sack 48,000 employees when they receive the notices. Telangana Mazdoor Union president E Ashwathama Reddy said so far they had not received any dismissal or suspension notice.

The Chief Minister has called for the hiring of 2,500 private buses, but the normal functioning of the TSRTC is expected to take at least two weeks to resume normalcy.

Recruit new people, hire pvt buses: KCR
