PMC claims it will soon tackle encroachments atop 12 streams

SEPT 25 FLOODS AFTERMATH



Activists caution that process needs to be transparent, all city streams need scrutiny



Almost two weeks after flash floods struck Pune amid torrential rain, Pune Municipal Corporation (PMC) is finally looking at a few of the reasons the calamity affected the city so intensely. Now, the local body is starting to crack down on encroachments atop and along streams in various areas. While citizens have welcomed the move, activists and experts have claimed that the involvement of the residents and affected people is necessary to ensure that such action is taken properly.



In the disaster on September 25, more than 15 people were killed in the city, and some are still missing. Earlier, the PMC commissioner announced that a study would be conducted to identify encroachments on flowing waterbodies — but action is likely to begin only now, even as a final report is still awaited.



An official meeting was held on Monday, after which it was decided that a policy against encroachments will be finalised. The city engineer has been instructed to identify and prepare a report on the plan of action, and the drive will then begin on ground in the next few days.



PMC encroachment department head Madhav Jagtap said, “We will start with 12 streams on which illegal structures are built. We are identifying the locations. Action will start by the end of this week.”



Activists welcomed the move but cautioned that the drive should be comprehensive, with all streams in the city getting identified and cleaned in the process. Environmentalist Sarang Yadwadkar said, “As far as I know, there are more than 55 streams in the city, so why is PMC just talking about 12? All these streams need to be cleared of encroachments. While I don’t understand what the need is to frame a policy, there is certainly a need for taking all this action that is being announced, and without favouring any of the parties involved. In fact, the help of affected people and local residents should be taken to identify encroachments. Perhaps then transparency will be ensured.”


