Ahead of Maharashtra elections, Uddhav Thackeray says ‘never conspired to pull down govt in last 5 yrs’

Shiv Sena chief Uddhav Thackeray and Maharashtra Chief Minister Devendra Fadnavis | Photo Credit: IANS

Key Highlights Maharashtra's ruling alliance - the Bharatiya Janata Party-Shiv Sena – will fight the October 21 Assembly Elections together with other allies In an alliance, both the parties must stay vigilant: Uddhav Thackeray The murderers of Aarey trees will have to pay a price for axing trees in the middle of the night: Uddhav Thackeray

Mumbai: Shiv Sena chief Uddhav Thackeray on Tuesday said that he never betrayed or conspired to pull down the Maharashtra government despite the fact that his party had not much power.

Notably, Maharashtra's ruling alliance - the Bharatiya Janata Party-Shiv Sena – will fight the October 21 Assembly Elections together with other allies.

In the second part of his interview to Shiv Sena mouthpiece Saamana, Thackeray cautioned that in an alliance, both the parties must stay vigilant and if one party picks up speed without any reason, it could lead to an "accident".

The Shiv Sena chief also spoke about his party's stand against tree felling in Aarey Colony, clarifying that they are not opposed to the Metro car shed, but the place where it is proposed.

Asserting that Mumbaikars, not Shiv Sena, opposed the proposed car shed in Aarey, Thackeray said the city needed Metro and development, but “while doing that, we shouldn't lose something more valuable”.

"The murderers of Aarey trees will have to pay a price for axing trees in the middle of the night. (Sena corporator) Yashwant Jadhav, the petitioner, was fined Rs 50,000 (by the court) while dismissing his plea. But murderers of Aarey trees will be responsible for damage to the environment," he said.

"Development should not happen by causing hardships to people," Thackeray said, adding that Shiv Sena would keep on voicing its concern over the issues related to citizens.

Thackeray further said if the BJP-Shiv Sena alliance wins the upcoming elections again, it will provide much better governance and administration.

When asked about Shiv Sena's protest over crop insurance, Thackeray reiterated that he takes a stand on the matters concerning people.

"When the government publicises its achievements, the work done is seen on the ground. I will continue to highlight people's issues before the government," he said.

"Did I betray the government or conspire to pull it down...No. We were in government without any power for the last five years. There were differences, and we raised our voice wherever we felt things were wrong," he added.

In an apparent reference to the breaking of BJP-Sena alliance prior to the 2014 Maharashtra Assembly Elections, Thackeray cautioned: "We need to control our mind. If you accelerate speed unnecessarily, we can meet with an accident. This has happened earlier.”

Thackeray said his party joined hands with the BJP only in the interest of Maharashtra.

"I compromised for the sake of the state. I am confident we can provide good administration and governance in the next five years based on the previous experience," said Thackeray.

"What was Devendra Fadnavis' experience when he first became the chief minister. Some of the Shiv Sena ministers were in that position earlier," he added.

Uddhav Thackeray further defended Prime Minister Narendra Modi’s act of criticising the Congress and NCP during his campaigns, saying that if the parties target Shiv Sena and BJP, "then we have to highlight their tenure".
