To combat desertification, Centre plans to create 1,400 km long 'green belt'

India seeks to replicate the idea of the 'Great Green Wall' of Africa | Photo Credit: Getty Images

Key Highlights The belt includes states and cities like Gujarat, Rajasthan, Haryana and Delhi This idea of forming the green belt from Porbandar to Panipat will help in restoring degraded land through afforestation The Aravali range is identified as one of the key degraded zones to be taken up for greening under India's target to restore 26 million hectares of its land

New Delhi: In a bid to combat climate change and desertification, the Centre is mulling over an ambitious plan to create a 1,400 km long and 5 km wide 'great green belt' from Gujarat to the Delhi-Haryana border.

Although the idea is at its initial stages, it has created a lot of excitement amid officials in various ministries, who reportedly believe that the project if approved, will turn out to be a legacy for the country. According to a report, the idea of forming the green belt from Porbandar to Panipat will help in restoring degraded land through afforestation along with the Aravali hill range. Also, the belt will act as a barrier for dust coming from the deserts in western India and Pakistan.

The belt includes states and cities like Gujarat, Rajasthan, Haryana and Delhi. Reportedly, an official told a media person that the idea of creating a huge green belt was parts of the agenda of the recently held conference (COP14) of the United Nations Convention to Combat Desertification (UNCCD) in India. However, the formal nod to the plan is still awaited.

India seeks to replicate the idea of the 'Great Green Wall' of Africa, where although the plan was mooted almost a decade ago, but authorities here are reportedly planning to consider this as the national priority. The idea is being planned to be implemented by 2030.

The Aravali range is identified as one of the key degraded zones to be taken up for greening under India's target to restore 26 million hectares of its land. India currently has 96.4 million hectares of degraded land which is 29.3 per cent of the country's total geographical area. Reportedly, as brought out by Indian Space Research Organisation (ISRO) in 2016, Gujarat, Rajasthan and Delhi were among states and Union Territories where more than 50 percent of the land was degraded and those under threat of desertification.

Another government official told media that a legacy programme like converting such a huge tract of land as a green belt in high-intensive land degraded states will be great boost towards meeting India's target.
