Will not back out even if I am targeted: Naidu

‘Centre has cheated Andhra Pradesh, but BJP leaders are making tall claims’

Chief Minister N. Chandrababu Naidu launched a scathing attack on the Central government and Prime Minister Narendra Modi for not fulfilling the assurances given to Andhra Pradesh (A.P.) at the time of bifurcation and asserted that he would not give up his fight for the State’s legitimate demands whatever happened to him.

Mr. Naidu said by staging a protest in New Delhi on February 11 before the Appropriation Bill is passed in Parliament two days later, he would once again highlight the injustice done by the Centre, and vowed to expose ‘the nexus’ between the BJP, the YSR Congress Party and the TRS.

“Don’t you have shame to make tall claims of the support extended by the Central government? You know what Mr. Modi did for Gujarat, Tamil Nadu and other States. Is there any comparison? Admit your mistake at least now,” he shouted at the BJP Floor Leader and Visakhapatnam north MLA P. Vishnu Kumar Raju as he reeled out statistics on the financial assistance provided to the State and various projects sanctioned by the Centre.

Participating in a short discussion on the ‘Implementation of A.P. Reorganisation Act’ in the Assembly here on Friday, Mr. Naidu said his blood was curdling as the Centre cheated A.P. and he was being personally targeted in the form of threats to send him to jail and get income-tax raids conducted on him.

BJP member P. Manikyala Rao sought to raise an objection when Mr. Naidu said he was unfit to be an MLA. The CM questioned the reason for the Central government’s reneging on its commitment to give the Special Category Status (SCS), which was duly incorporated in the BJP manifesto.

‘Biased approach’

The Centre had created many hurdles from the beginning, but its leaders had unleashed false propaganda to put the TDP in the dock, he alleged. Mr. Naidu said he would quit politics if the BJP proved that there were national projects progressing at a faster pace than Polavaram.

The CM alleged that the BJP had treated leaders from south India with disdain, wondering whether the elevation of M. Venkaiah Naidu to the Vice-President’s post was a promotion or punishment. He sought to know with what face was Mr. Modi coming to the State and whether people would believe his fresh rhetoric.
