Sacred Games season 2 ending: How does show end? Saif Ali Khan breaks silence

Sacred Games season 2 finished on a huge cliffhanger

new TV releases for 2022 and behind the scenes news SUBSCRIBE Invalid email Don't miss the bestfor 2022 and behind the scenes news We use your sign-up to provide content in ways you've consented to and to improve our understanding of you. This may include adverts from us and 3rd parties based on our understanding. You can unsubscribe at any time. More info

Sacred Games: Guruji recites the words 'aham brahmasmi'

The latest run of Sacred Games came to quite the end without any of the loose ends wrapped up. Season two had a different flavour to the first outing as it continued to follow police detective Sartaj Singh (played by Saif Ali Khan) as he tried to stop a nuclear bomb attack on Mumbai. Although the second run revealed the identity of the conspirators as well as their motives, the final scene left things open and in need of a satisfying conclusion.

WARNING: This article contains spoilers from Sacred Games season 2 The final scene of season two saw Sartaj desperately trying to break the code and diffuse the nuclear bomb. While his colleagues fled from the scene, Sartaj was determined to stop the attack and foil Guru Ji’s (Pankaj Tripathi) plans. Sartaj had a certain number of attempts to break the code with the police officer down to one. However, the screen cut to black before viewers could find out whether he had successfully stopped the bomb on his last go.

Sacred Games season 2 saw Sartaj Singh trying to crack the code

Sacred Games season 2 finished on a huge cliffhanger

Speaking about the cliffhanger, he said: “I was okay with the ending because it doesn’t make a difference – either it blows up or he saves it. I quite like the show; it was differently placed. “The first season had some crazy things – Cuckoo’s character and development of my character. Vikram [Motwane] really nailed it as a director. “Second season, the climax could have been... I like it but I can understand people preferred the first one, that’s the vibe I got.” He also told Indian publication Bollywood Hungama that he was happier with the audience reception to the first compared the follow-up.

Ali Khan said: “I think some people found it a little different and it was always going to be a little different. “It is called Sacred Games and it is about a guru going on about things.” Netflix has yet to confirm whether Sacred Games will be returning for a third outing. If the show does get the go-ahead, the producers will be starting from scratch and will have to take a new direction. The show will also have to resolve the cliffhanger and give fans some satisfaction about whether Sartaj was able to stop the bomb.

Sacred Games season 2 didn't reveal whether Sartaj was successful

Sacred Games season 2 cut to black before fans got a definitive ending
