Cow vigilantism Shiv Sena's poll plank in Haryana, fields man accused of attacking ex-JNU student Umar Khalid

I have promised to the people that if elected I will donate my salary for cow protection and other social works | Photo from Facebook/Naveen Dalal

Cow vigilantism and nationalism are some of the top agendas of the Shiv Sena in the upcoming Haryana Assembly elections. The Shiv Sena is contesting elections in three Haryana assembly constituencies - Barwala, Bahadurgarh and Badkhal.

The Shiv Sena stirred a controversy by fielding self-styled cow vigilante group activist Naveen Dalal from Bahadurgarh Assembly constituency.

Naveen Dalal and his accomplice Darvesh Shahpur are accused of attacking former Jawaharlal Nehru University (JNU) student leader Umar Khalid in New Delhi in August, 2018. Both had also confessed on social media having attacked Umar Khalid.

When contacted in-charge Haryana Shiv Sena, Mukesh Bawa confirmed that Naveen Dalal was contesting election on the party ticket from Bahadurgarh, previously won by Bharatiya Janata Party's (BJP) Naresh Kaushik.

In-charge of South Haryana Vikram Singh Yadav said, "The allegations against Naveen Dalal were not proved and the party has considered his candidature on the basis of the work he has done in the field of cow protection which is true nationalism. The BJP remained in power for five years and did nothing to protect cows. On ground the cows are being killed in road accidents and tortured by the people. So far as the vigilantism is concerned it is nationalism of its own kind. If voted to power we will enact a law which will attract capital punishment for cow torture and slaughter."

Naveen Dalal claimed that he was getting support from the people of Bahadurgarh as he has done social work besides cow protection during the past 10 years. He writes Gaurakshak (cow protector) before his names and his supporters shout 'Gau Mata Ki Jai' in his rallies.

"Cows are being killed in accidents. They need care and protection. I have promised to the people that if elected I will donate my salary for cow protection and other social works including the marriage of poor girls. I am getting full support from the people as they need a leader who listens to them and their demands besides assuring his availability," Naveen Dalal said.

Naveen Dalal says he joined the Shiv Sena with a mission and wants to dedicate himself for the social cause. He says he did not join any political party during the past decades as he found them unsuitable.
