Gurugram’s AQI outlook: The good air days might be behind us

GURUGRAM: Just a day after Dussehra air pollution levels shot up by more than 50% in Gurugram. The air quality index ( AQI ) which was recorded at 78 on Tuesday — the day of the festival — went up to 122 on Wednesday, pushing the air quality down from ‘satisfactory’ to ‘moderate’.For the last one month, the levels have been consistently ‘satisfactory’ or ‘good’ — better than last year. While there were only three ‘good’ days in September last year, nine were recorded in the month this year and just one day with ‘poor’ air quality. Even in the first eight days of October, the city’s air was ‘satisfactory’.According to a SAFAR forecast, the AQI can go up to 144 in the next 48 hours. The air quality early warning system of the Union ministry of earth sciences states that the air in Gurugram will improve slightly on Thursday but might deteriorate from Friday. “The air quality is likely to improve marginally on October 10. After that, from October 11, the air quality is likely to deteriorate marginally and likely to remain in the moderate category,” states the warning system.Meanwhile, Delhi’s overall AQI on Dussehra at 4pm was 112 (moderate), but 24 hours later CPCB’s daily air quality bulletin read 173 (moderate), a considerable spike.However, this was the cleanest post-Dussehra day Delhi has recorded since 2015. On October 9, 2018, the air quality was in the “poor” category with AQI touching 251. Experts attribute the improvement this year to a mix of factors, including favourable meteorological conditions, better preparedness and a switch to green crackers or “digital” effigy burning, among others.As soon as the AQI touched the ‘moderate’ mark in Gurugram, the authorities geared up to prevent the city from turning into a gas chamber like in the previous years. The district administration issued directions to 20 departments to look into the causes of the worsening air quality. Interestingly, the deputy commissioner has warned all the departments that the EPCA chief Bhure Lal is expected to visit Gurugram. “If he observes any non-compliance, the concerned officer will be held responsible,” states the directions (a copy of which is with TOI).The deputy commissioner has issued a comprehensive list of measures that all the 20 departments — MCG, GMDA, HSPV, PWD, police department, RTA, additional deputy commissioner, transport department, agriculture department, education department, food & supply department, department of explosives/fire safety, forest department, revenue department, panchayat department, NHAI, Town and country planning department, health department and Haryana state pollution control board (HSPCB). Some of the key measures include sprinkling water on roads, increasing the frequency of mechanised cleaning of roads, strict action against construction projects found to be violating norms, ensuring strict ban on waste burning and dumping, impounding diesel vehicles older than 10 years and petrol vehicle older than 15 years, action against illegal parking, no permit to sell or use firecrackers, and stop the use of firewood and coal in hotels.“Directions have been issued to appoint a nodal officer in all concerned departments for ensuring proper and strict implementation of the GRAP (graded response action plan) measures. All departments will provide the contact details of the nodal officers to the regional officer of HSPCB. Otherwise, department heads will be presumed to be nodal officers for ensuring GRAP measures,” said deputy commissioner Amit Khatri.“It is only after Dussehra that the air quality has deteriorated to the Moderate levels. Also, the situation in the city has been better than in other cities of Delhi-NCR. However, a pro-active step has been taken by the deputy commissioner who has issued a comprehensive list of measures that all departments need to carry out,” said a senior official of HSPCB.
