Indiabulls Housing Finance, Lakshmi Vilas Bank in focus

Shares of Indiabulls Housing Finance and Lakshmi Vilas Bank will be in focus. RBI has informed that the application for voluntary amalgamation of the Indiabulls Housing Finance with Lakshmi Vilas Bank can't be allowed.

Indiabulls Housing Finance said that the meeting of the board of directors of the company is scheduled on 14 October 2019, to consider and approve the proposal of buyback of equity shares of the company.

IndusInd Bank and TCS will declare their Q2 results today, 10 October 2019.

Bharti Airtel announced that its wholly-owned subsidiary Network i2i Limited (the Company), has priced a offering of US$ 750 million 5.650% Subordinated Perpetual Securities (the Securities). The Securities are guaranteed by Bharti Airtel. The Securities priced at par at a coupon and yield of 5.650%. The proceeds shall be used for refinancing , investments in subsidiaries and general corporate purpose. The announcement was made after market hours yesterday, 9 October 2019.

Union Bank of India said that the Committee of Directors for raising of capital funds has approved preferential issue of new equity shares at issue price to be determined to the Government of India (President of India), for an amount aggregating up to Rs 11768 crore (including premium). The announcement was made after market hours yesterday, 9 October 2019.

Torrent Pharmaceuticals said that the company has received a warning letter from the USFDA for its Indrad facility in Gujarat. This action follows the earlier intimation received from USFDA in August 2019, wherein the agency had classified its inspection as 'Official Action Indicated' (OAI). The company does not believe that the warning letter will have an impact of disruption of supplies or the existing revenues from operations of this facility. The announcement was made after market hours yesterday, 9 October 2019.

Reserve Bank of India (RBI) has intimated about its inability to accede to the request made by Bank of Maharashtra for setting-off Rs 7360.29 crore accumulated losses against the balance lying in Share Premium account and Revenue Reserve account of bank. The announcement was made after market hours yesterday, 9 October 2019.

Powered by Capital Market - Live News

(This story has not been edited by Business Standard staff and is auto-generated from a syndicated feed.)
