Longer stay at hospitals for better dengue fight

CHENNAI: Admit early, discharge late is the new protocol for management of dengue that Tamil Nadu has developed to ensure “zero” dengue deaths.When the temperature brought on by fever is beyond 100F, parents are urged to admit their children to the Institute of Child Health, (ICH) were additional 100 beds have been created to battle against dengue and other seasonal fevers. On Wednesday, there were more than 156 children with fever, of whom 30 were diagnosed positive for dengue.“We don’t mind keeping children or adults in government hospitals on the first day of fever even if they are not showing signs of dengue. This will help us diagnose the viral disease early, start treatment and offer appropriate care,” said health minister C Vijayabaskar.“If they show symptoms of dengue or if they are diagnosed with dengue they are kept in a separate ward where there is intensive monitoring. There are cell counters by the bedside that will give results in just a few seconds. Staff nurses will ensure rehydration through the day,” he said.The government has also started a post-febrile ward in all its hospitals. Patients who are admitted for treatment of dengue will be monitored for 48 hours after fever settles down. “We want to ensure their appetite is normal and there are no complications. There have been instances when people have been discharged after fever but they return with serious complications,” health secretary Beela Rajesh said.Although international protocols do not recommend early admissions senior paediatricians in government say the model suits Tamil Nadu.“The first three days of fever is critical. Children should be given adequate fluids and care should be taken to ensure diagnosis is not missed,” said Dr S Srinivasan, coordinator, state Nodal Centre-National Rural Health Mission at ICH.Infectious disease experts however warn that longer stay at hospitals could increase risk of infections for patients. “More than anything else if private hospitals follow the same protocol costs may double,” a senior doctor said.
