DMK stages protest against property tax hike, water project

Coimbatore: DMK and opposition party cadres staged a protest against property tax hike and privatisation of water supply, and courted arrest in the city on Thursday. Led by DMK’s SInganallur MLA N Karthik, party cadres wearing black shirts assembled in front of the south taluk office demanding the city corporation to withdraw the tax hike and scrap the agreement with the French firm for drinking water supply.Several cadres from Congress, MDMK, Viduthalai Chiruthaigal Katchi, Left parties and Dravidar Kazhagam participated in the protest. Besides Karthik, former DMK minister Pongalur N Palaniswamy was also present.DMK had initially called a bandh on October 27, which was stayed by the Madras high court. Later, the party planned a protest and approached police seeking permission. However, police denied permission citing the court order.Despite the denial, DMK cadres staged the protest. The agitators raised slogans against the corporation and the state government alleging that the privatisation of water supply would have adverse effect in the long run. Karthik alleged that drinking water supply was an essential service, which should be done by the civic body and raised apprehensions that the privatisation would spell difficulty for the public in getting seamless supply.Meanwhile, the city corporation commissioner issued a warning against those spreading false information about the water supply project. In a statement attributed to corporation commissioner Shravan Kumar Jatavath, the civic body said that the benefits of the privatised water supply scheme has been explained to residents several times. Besides, it has been clarified that fixing the tariff would be done by the corporation and so was the quantum of supply. “But some political parties and outfits are spreading wrong information and are also organising protests, even though the HC had stayed a bandh called by the parties against the scheme to create fear among public,” the statement said.“When the hearing of the case is under way, such protests amount to contempt of court. The city corporation would initiate legal action against those protesting,’’ it added.
