Citizenship bill staring at uncertain fate

SHILLONG/NEW DELHI: Chief Minister Conrad Sangma said on Friday the government will approach like-minded parties to oppose the Citizenship (Amendment) Bill, 2016.

Sangma along with Deputy Chief Minister Prestone Tynsong, Asom Gana Parishad’s Atul Bora and Prafulla Kumar Mahanta and UDP’s Donkupar Roy met leaders of several NDA allies, including those of JDU, Shiv Sena, Akali Dal and the Lok Janshakti Party requesting them to oppose the bill.

“After discussing with all the leaders, we got a very positive response from almost all the allies who have agreed to vote against the bill if it is brought in the Rajya Sabha,” the chief minister said in an audio statement.

Sangma informed that they will continue meeting other parties and “appeal to them to vote against the bill if it is brought (in the Upper House)and to oppose it and continue appealing to the government of India not to table the bill in the Rajya Sabha,” he added.

“At the same time we are also appealing to the government not to go ahead with the bill, which will harm the interest of the North East and other parts of the country,” Sangma said.

At this moment, the fate of the contentious bill looks uncertain.

The BJP is in minority in the Upper House and if the allies also join the opposition chorus against the bill it cannot be passed in this session. The budget session will be the last one of the present government since elections to the Lok Sabha are expected to be declared next month.

Earlier, the government had contemplated to call a meeting of all the chief ministers of the North East, including the three from the BJP-ruled states of Assam, Manipur and Tripura, here. But the meeting, to be held at the home minister’s official residence, was cancelled at the last moment.

Amid the ongoing protests against the bill, Prime Minister Narendra Modi will visit the northeastern states on February 8 as he is scheduled to inaugurate some projects in Assam and Tripura, a senior BJP leader said on Friday.

“The Prime Minister is likely to hold a crucial meeting with party leaders of Northeast India on February 8 and 9 in Guwahati. He is meeting all the state in-charges on a strategy for the Lok Sabha polls,” said the leader requesting anonymity.

More protests

The All Garo Hills Joint Action Committee (AGHJAC) has warned that more protests are in the offing unless the government withdraws the controversial bill.

“The 11-hour non-cooperative movement has helped people become aware of the problems of CAB. The awareness has spread to every corner of Garo Hills. We were encouraged not to stop but to continue against this bill, which will be dangerous to the people of the NE region,” stated AGHJAC convener Balkarin Marak in a communiqué.

The group also extended support and appreciation to the two-day rally in Shillong and Guwahati.
