Skoda Superb Price in India 2022

Skoda Auto India has launched the refreshed Superb sedan for the 2021 model year. The 2021 Skoda Superb comes with a host of new features and is priced at Rs. 31.99 lakh for the SportLine and Rs. 34.99 lakh (all prices, ex-showroom, India) for the Laurin & Klement variants. For 2021, the Superb aims to be more value-friendly with the new feature upgrades, and the extra set of features come months after the facelifted version went on sale in the country last year.

The 2021 Skoda Superb sedan now comes with new adaptive LED headlamps that optimise illumination by factoring the variation in speed, light, and weather. The adaptive front-lighting also gets swivelling and cornering function, along with dynamic headlamp inclination control. It gets different modes of its own including city, inter-city, motorway, and rain. The headlamps also get the coming/leaving Home function and the LED turn indicators as standard equipment.

Furthermore, the 2021 Skoda Superb gets the Virtual Cockpit digital instrument cluster and an updated infotainment system. The new 8-inch touchscreen display with proximity sensor gets an updated user interface that includes the new-generation Amundsen infotainment system with inbuilt navigation. Notably, there is now wireless charging and connectivity for Apple CarPlay and Android Auto. The new system also supports voice command and new Type-C USB ports. Lastly, the 2021 Skoda Superb gets 360-degree camera with park assist on the L&K trim.

Aesthetic changes include the new carbon decor with the three-spoke flat-bottom steering wheel on the SportLine, along with black Alcantara seats with integrated headrests. The Superb Laurin & Klement variant is spruced up with the piano black decor that brings stone beige or coffee brown finished perforated leather upholstery. The L&K also uses more chrome and a two-spoke steering wheel design with the Laurin & Klement inscription.

Apart from the new features, the 2021 Skoda Superb continues to use the same 2.0-litre turbo petrol engine under the hood with 187 bhp. The motor is paired with a 7-speed DSG automatic. The Superb competes against the Toyota Camry Hybrid in the segment.
