Fulfilling a dream: Kerala govt gives Adam, first Indian trans man pilot, Rs 25 lakh

Fulfilling a dream: Kerala govt gives Adam, first Indian trans man pilot, Rs 25 lakh

Speaking to TNM, Adam Harry expressed his happiness that he will now be able to pursue his education without hiding his gender identity.

news Inspiration

20-year-old Adam Harry, India’s first trans man pilot, is excited that the Kerala state government is offering him Rs 25 lakh to complete his education.

In 2017, Adam had obtained a private pilot license and become the first trans man pilot in the country. However, it was a struggle for Adam, who hails from Thrissur, to fulfill his dream of getting a commercial pilot license.

Speaking to TNM, Adam Harry expressed his happiness that he will now be able to pursue his education without hiding his gender identity.

“I am really excited and happy that the Kerala government came forward to offer me this help. I am even happier about the fact that I can now continue my education without hiding my gender identity,” he says.

Though Adam’s family had supported his education earlier, the spotlight on him becoming the first trans man pilot of India, made them disown him. He had been struggling ever since to continue his education.

But now, with the Minister of the Department of Social Justice KK Shailaja announcing that the government will bear his educational expenses, Adam is hopeful. The government has also facilitated his admission at the Rajiv Gandhi Academy for Aviation Technology in Thiruvananthapuram.

Becoming a pilot was Adam’s wish from childhood. He was sent by his family to Johannesburg to pursue a private pilot course. “My family knew then that I was a trans man. But when it became news after I came back, I had to face lot of mental trauma from the family and had to leave the house,” says Adam.

After being pushed out of the family, Adam had been doing small jobs until he recently approached the Social Justice Department of the government. Minister KK Shailaja, who heads the department, offered the aid to Adam on meeting him.

“I remember when Adam first came to meet me, he asked about the possibility of a job. But I asked him ‘shouldn’t we fly’. Now I am happy that it (the dream) has been fulfilled,” wrote Minister KK Shailaja on Facebook on Friday.

She also added that the government is aiming for the comprehensive development of the transgender community. “Various projects are being implemented to give shelter, jobs and education. We will go to any extent to fight against the injustice done to the community. Anyone can acquire any heights if they try, Adam is an example for that,” the minister stated.

Adam, who is in Thiruvananthapuram now, is all set to join the aviation academy in two weeks. But amidst the happiness and excitement of moving closer to his dream, Adam also shared that his family has still not accepted him.

Also read:

How a Kerala village came together to dispel fear around a 'haunted' waterfall

For better durability, Kerala dam safety authority recommends roof over Idukki arch dam
