Dakha bypolls: After SAD, RTI activist writes to EC for para forces

Ludhiana: A city-based RTI activist Kuldeep Khaira has requested the chief election commissioner of the Election Commission (EC) of India for passing orders for the deployment of paramilitary forces at every booth of Dakha constituency, fearing misuse of power by the ruling party for winning the seat.

In his request letter he mentioned, “Since Congress candidate Sandeep Sandhu has been close to chief minister Amarinder Singh for the last two years and has resigned from his post of officer on special duty to the CM just to contest the byelections, misuse power and influence the administration is obvious.”

In the letter Khaira mentioned that he had no affiliation with any party but he was all for peaceful voting and public should cast vote without any fear. He claimed that Sandhu had remained eyes and ears of the CM and every single instruction of the CM had come to the administration through him ‘so none of the officials has the might to challenge his might’. He claimed that it was the history of Punjab that the ruling party had been successful in registering victory during bypolls because of the influence on the administration.

Khaira also claimed that there were chances that at the last moment many genuine voters might miss their votes and bogus voting might take place on October 21. He requested the EC to deploy paramilitary forces in Dakha constituency, specifically at every polling station, while it can be considered and in general for the other three constituencies. He said it would help in keeping check on the ongoing voting process and voters would be able to cast votes easily.

Recently, the Akali leadership too had raised this concern and had apprehended that the ruling party could even create disturbance in Dakha constituency. They had also warned the ruling party against misusing the government machinery or trying to pressurize the voters. They had also given a complaint to the election commission while demanding paramilitary forces for the polls.



Facebook Twitter Linkedin EMail
