Telangana RTC strike: Will not tolerate goondaism, no talks with RTC unions: CM K Chandrasekhar Rao

HYDERABAD: Ruling out talks with Telangana State Road Transport Corporation (TSRTC) unions and joint action committee JAC ) leaders, the state government said it will not recognise the ‘illegal’ strike and declared it will not take back the employees into service at any cost.Chief minister K Chandrasekhar Rao , who reviewed the strike with transport minister P Ajay Kumar principal secretary of transport Sunil Sharma and other officials, directed them to make arrangements for running 100% buses in the next three days. He asked them to take measures so that all bus passes are accepted.The CM said: “Even if (RTC JAC) intensifies or take any steps, the government will not be shaken or afraid. It will not tolerate if attempts are made to stop the buses, as well as organising of dharnas at bus stations and depots. We will not tolerate any goondaism,” he said.“There is no question of having any talks with those striking employees. The employees went on strike on their own and abstained from duties. They will not be taken back come what may,” Chandrasekhar Rao said at the meeting. He instructed officials to pay September salaries to those who were attending duties.Since the RTC JAC announced a series of protests, including a state bandh on October 19, the CM spoke to director general of police (DGP) M Mahender Reddy to deploy forces at bus depots and stands to prevent protests by RTC workers.He asked Reddy to increase security cover at all RTC depots and bus stands. “Set up CCTV camera at every point. Utilise the services of the intelligence department and women police. Book cases, arrest and send people to court those indulging in unlawful activities, violence and trying to stop buses. There is no point in tolerating those indulging in damaging and destroying the property in the name of agitation,” he told the DGP.He instructed officials to appoint required employees to run 50% RTC buses, hire 30% of buses and give stage carriage route permits to 20% private buses. He asked officials to utilise the services of retired RTC and police department drivers.
