Trauma, Resistance, Resilience: Another citizen’s report released on Kashmir’s trauma post Aug 5

Trauma, Resistance, Resilience: Another citizen’s report released on Kashmir’s trauma post Aug 5

NEW DELHI, Oct 12: Another citizen’s report on Kashmir titled ‘Kashmir Civil Disobedience – Trauma, Resistance, Resilience’, which is a stark narrative of the happenings in the Valley, two months after the unilateral abrogation of Article. 370, was released today.

Four activists – Anirudh Kala – psychiatrist and author of ‘The Unsafe Asylum – Stories of Partition and Madness’, Brinelle Dsouza – academic, activist and a public health professional, RevatiLaul – journalist and author of ‘The Anatomy of Hate’ and Shabnam Hashmi – social activist and founder of Anhad, travelled to Kashmir between September 25 – 30 and Jammu between October 6 and 7 to take stock of the ground reality and understand the impact of the security clampdown and communication blockade on the citizens of the proposed Union Territory.

Releasing the report, the fourt activists said that “to protect the people we met, we have withheld all names and identity markers. But we have reproduced large chunks of what they told us, unprocessed, so that this becomes open-source material for whoever finds it useful.” The 76 page report is divided into different chapters: “The Big Picture or Why We Wrote It, Who We Are , Civil Disobedience, Trauma, Radicalization, Extremism and the loss of a middle ground , Fear , Disunion , Love and resilience ,Recommendations , Annexures- Citizens outside J & K, Voices from Kargil, Govt notices.”

They said that the Indian government has spun the story that their clampdown on civil liberties in Kashmir with an increased military presence, summary arrests of all mainstream and separatist leaders and the communication blockade has made the unfolding of this new reality peaceful. They challenged this perspective and said, “we found exactly the opposite. Kashmir is on edge - humiliated, angry, disturbed and ‘disrobed,' as a journalist who spoke to us described it. The fact that there has been no violence has to do with the resilience of the people. It is an active and collective choice being exercised each day, to observe a civil disobedience. In feeling rejected and betrayed by the Indian state, Kashmiris have chosen to respond back, through a largely non-violent protest.”

They said that most people they met told them they were keeping their shops and offices closed not under any call by militants or separatists or political leaders but as an act of resistance against the Indian state. “This time, there is no leader and no call to protest from anyone. So the decision to keep shops and businesses shut is one that individuals have taken across Kashmir, largely on their own,” they were told by a cross-section of people they met.

The four activists also said that collective shock, fear of reprisal has also turned them into silent protestors. “This may well be the lull before the storm or the making of molten mass that is bound to erupt; but regardless of what comes next, these 60 days need to be recorded as a phenomenon in its own right,” they opined.

“We spoke to a spectrum of people from politicians ,bureaucrats, homemakers, schoolteachers, traders, fruit-sellers, taxi unions, students, teachers, intellectuals, poets, writers, farmers, children, journalists, civil society workers, Pandits, Sikhs and Christians and even wedding caterers across five districts over eight days. From Srinagar to Baramulla to Anantnag to Badgam and Jammu, all had one thing in common – every single interaction was an emotional outpouring. So we decided to write about what has gone amiss in the day to day lives of people and to present that as an emotional landscape. We felt that would be the truest way to tell the story of what we saw, heard and experienced in this very short trip,” they said while releasing the report.

“Kashmir is riddled with fear that spiral binds itself in sharp concertina wire around the valley. There are stories of torture, arrests, even of young boys detained under the draconian Public Safety Act. Despite this fear, people defied the odds and chose to keep their shops closed. Were they motivated by militants? We only picked up two or three instances where people said they had seen notices pasted possibly by militants, on a masjid wall, warning people against opening their shops. We heard many more anecdotes about how the armed forces and para-military taken together were forcing people to keep their establishments open,” they further said.

Speaking to a host of individuals from various fields – bureaucrats, traders, Pandits, journalists and even children, the researchers found one thing in common – an emotional outpour.

They said that Kashmiris now know that their usual modes of protest will hold no ground against its oppressors. This time, after the clampdown, they have resorted to a different strategy. Even though they’ve been forced to re-open their shops and establishments, their choice to defy the military has been a bold one. They quoted one journalist who explained - “There are two kinds of resistance at work – opening shops for two hours in the morning and two hours in the evening. And the silent resistance of not protesting.”

On their drive back from Baramulla to Srinagar city, the activists met a group of traders and businessmen. The most echoed sentiment? “Don't call us a UT or a union territory, we are an OT – occupied territory.”

They also spoke about a transporter who summed up the post abrogation of 370 situation as, “Kashmir has had one eye taken out, Jammu has had both eyes removed.”

“A contingent of transporters and traders that we met could not stop talking about their all-around distress. They told us that transport is a 35,000-crore business in Jammu. It has come to a standstill. Sara karobar thap ho gaya. “If there were 500 vehicles at the railway station every day, they take goods from the trains to nearby towns within a 50 km radius. Earlier these 500 trucks would have a trip a day which got them 800-1000 rupees. Post abrogation, that has come down to one trip in four days,” a transporter explained to them.

They, however, said “But the stories of trauma that were the most disturbing came from students of various minorities studying at Jammu University. They told us they have resigned themselves to being second class citizens. They said they fear for their lives. They are being called terrorists on campus for being Muslim and live in the constant fear of being lynched.”

Some of the recommendations they made included:

Immediate restoration of Articles 370 and 35A and statehood.

1. Release all political leaders, social activists, youth, and children, withdraw all cases

2. Government of India must work with all stakeholders to bring about peace and normalcy in the state and ensure that decisions regarding the political future of J& K are made through a process of dialogue and consultation and after ascertaining the will of the people

3. Provide mental health services in every district with immediate effect as mandated as mandated under the Mental Health Care Act, 2017

4. Lift restrictions on movement of journalists so that there can be genuine on ground reporting. Refrain from monitoring, surveillance and intimidation of journalists

5. Give an urgent patient hearing to the representations and restore the constitutional safeguards

6. Undertake an independent assessment of those killed and injured and deaths due to negligence and not being able to access medical services
