Hoho warns Centre against ‘dividing’ Nagas

GUWAHATI: Naga Hoho, the apex traditional organisation of all tribes in Nagaland, has warned the Centre against “dividing Nagas with a piecemeal settlement in tacit understanding and collusion with a few groups” which, it believed, would only result in more conflicts and bloodshed among the Nagas.

“At this defining moment of history, the government of India leaders are reminded not to divide Nagas further with a piecemeal settlement in tacit understanding and collusion with a few groups backed by some public leaders with vested, parochial interests, as it will only result in more conflicts and bloodshed among the Nagas,” a statement issued by Naga Hoho said.

It is also appealed to all the Naga negotiating parties to find common grounds, accommodate one another in the larger interests of the whole Naga family and put in concerted efforts to arrive at an inclusive, acceptable and honourable settlement with the Centre.

“While appreciating the negotiators and the government of India for the commitment to hammer out an honourable settlement, the Naga Hoho wishes to remind the government to keep its commitments. Yet then, we cannot afford to succumb to inducements of economic packages and divide and rule policy of the government,” it said.

It asserted that the government’s three-month deadline to solve the vexed Indo-Naga political imbroglio in the form of an imposed settlement was unacceptable to the Nagas when the core issues are yet to be resolved amicably.

“If the government of India decides to impose its ‘take it or leave it’ or ‘carrot and stick’ policies on the Nagas, the approach will only vitiate the existing peaceful environment and negate all the sincere efforts put in by both Indian and Naga leaders during the last many years in the quest for a lasting honourable solution,” the apex traditional body of the Nagas stated.

It further affirmed that any accord that does not honour the Nagas’ legitimate rights for integration, separate Naga flag and constitution was neither honourable nor acceptable to the Nagas.

“We are convinced that there is a ray of hope and opportunity for the Nagas to begin a new chapter in our journey of common hope for a bright future if we are united, but it will never be if we are divided. Envisioning the Naga political solution at the doorstep, all concerned individuals and groups have aired their views and opinions to the negotiating parties and the Government of India,” it said.
