India Mobile Congress invitation to Huawei not a nod for 5G play: DoT

Inviting Huawei to showcase its prowess at the India Mobile Congress (IMC) is no indication that the government has given its nod to the Chinese equipment maker for either 5G trials or deployments in India, a senior telecom department official has said. " IMC and 5G trials or its vendorship are completely independent of each other. No one should get the indication that we have given our consent to Huawei," the official said on condition of anonymity. "The decision (on whether to allow Huawei for 5G trials or deployments) has not been taken yet." The official’s comments scuttles Huawei’s enthusiasm after having received the nod to showcase its wares at the three-day event, and prolongs its wait to know its fate in the world’s second largest telecom market.IMC is a three-day conclave starting Monday in New Delhi where telecom operators, and global equipment and handset makers will highlight their latest offerings and showcase products lined up for the future, including those around 5G.The Department of Telecommunications (DoT) has invited Chinese firms Huawei and ZTE along with telecom operators and other European vendors for the conclave. Huawei, in the eye of storm over security concerns, had considered the invitation to be a positive indication. "The trust, confidence and the support being given by Government of India during this critical juncture, it is very important for us. This will send a strong signal to the industry," Huawei India CEO Jay Chen was quoted in a media report last week. "That will create overall confidence for industry and stakeholders. It will give confidence to operators to work with us and roll out more and more of new technologies," Chen had said. The acceptance of the Chinese vendors for IMC came in the backdrop of Chinese President Xi Jinping’s visit to India and his meetings with PM Modi.But with the latest comment from the senior official, the celebrations may have been premature. Controversy has gripped Huawei on the back of alleged cyber snooping concerns flagged by the US, which has pointed to the Chinese vendor’s proximity with the Chinese government. Washington has been pressurising India to bar the Chinese company from its 5G deployments, while Beijing has warned New Delhi of consequences if Huawei was barred.India, which is set to hold 5G trials shortly and sell airwaves supporting the next generation technology early next year, has reiterated on many platforms that it will take a call basis its own national security needs. Chen has repeatedly urged India to take a speedy call to end the uncertainty. Another recent media report quoted Chen saying that keeping the company out of 5G would be a 'loss' to operators and other industry players.Last week, the Chinese vendor got a shot in the arm after Sunil Mittal, chairman of India’s No. 2 mobile phone company, rebutted US secretary of commerce Wilbur Ross and argued that India should consider deploying Huawei’s 5G network. Mittal had gone to the extent of saying that Huawei’s 3G and 4G products were better than those of its European rivals Ericsson and Nokia.
