BJP sets Sena Jan 31 deadline to toe the line

BJP

Uddhav Thackeray

Lok Sabha elections

Shiv Sena

Devendra Fadnavis

Devendra Fadnavis; Uddhav Thackeray

The prospects for a BJP-Shiv Sena alliance looked bleak on Thursday with thesetting January 31 as the deadline forto take a decision.After months of waiting patiently and taking daily Sena jabs on the chin, the BJP seems to have hardened its stand. At a meeting of its Maharashtra MPs in Delhi on Wednesday evening, Amit Shah made it clear that the BJP will not bow to any unreasonable demands and nor will it wait beyond a point for the Sena to make up its mind.With just months to go for, this now seems like the last stand.It is clear now that the BJP will not offer a Bihar-like deal to thein Maharashtra. In Bihar, despite holding 22 Lok Sabha seats, the BJP agreed to contest only 17 to accommodate Nitish Kumar’s Janata Dal United. In Maharashtra, the BJP not only wants to contest every seat it won in 2014, but also some more.Behind this aggressive posturing is a growing confidence in the party that it may be able to add to its 2014 tally in the state if it contests all 48 seats. It won 23 seats in the last elections and some leaders believe the party can win over 30 seats if it is not tied down in an alliance with the Sena.The Sena on its part has acted like opposition despite being a partner in the government. Its mouthpiece spews venom against the BJP every day and Sena leaders never miss an opportunity to target Modi, Shah, and Chief MinisterSpeaking at a public rally in Pandharpur last month, Uddhav threw his weight behind the Congress, borrowing a line from its president Rahul Gandhi’s book to target Prime Minister Narendra Modi—‘Chowkidar chor hai’.On Wednesday, while speaking in Parliament during a discussion on Rafale deal, Sena MP from South Mumbai Arvind Sawant supported the opposition’s demand for a joint parliamentary committee (JPC). “If the government has nothing to hide, then why is it afraid of appointing a JPC,” he asked.Then also, the alliance is not only about the Lok Sabha elections. More important to the Sena is the assembly elections that will take place in September-October.The Sena wants a 50:50 seat split and an assurance that if it wins more seats, a Sainik will get the chief minister’s post. If the two parties win equal number of seats, Sena wants split chief ministership, with each party getting two-and-half years to head the government.The BJP, however, is not willing to make such a compromise. The party not only wants to contest all the seats it won in the 2014 assembly elections, but also those where it stood second. In the last elections, BJP won 122 seats and Sena won 63. The BJP stood second in 60 seats. However, of these 60, 22 were won by the Sena. Which means BJP can lay claim to 38 seats by virtue of having finished second. That comes to 160 seats. Under the same formula, Sena would get only 100 seats. With BJP’s ally Rastriya Samaj Party having won one seat, that leaves only 27 seats to bargain for. This places the Sena at a great disadvantage. It’s only hope then -- use the BJP’s desperation to retain power in Delhi to force a compromise in Maharashtra.However, no party wants to take the blame for breaking the alliance. So the question is – who will blink first?A senior BJP leader, while speaking with Mumbai Mirror recently, agreed that if Sena breaks away from the National Democratic Alliance (NDA), it will make for bad optics for the BJP. Questions will be raised about the BJP’s ability to carry its allies along, he said.For the Sena, no alliance would certainly lead to a drop in its Lok Sabha tally. Some experts predict it could drop from 18 to under 10.The Sena on Thursday said there was no need for it to respond to the January 31deadline set by the BJP. “Has the chief minister or the BJP president set this deadline? We will respond when they say something officially,” said Sena MP and Saamna’s executive editor Sanjay Raut. When asked about the possibility of an alliance shaping, Raut said: “We are doing our work and they are doing theirs. That’s it for now,” Raut said.The chief spokesman for BJP in Maharashtra Madhav Bhandari said the decision on how long to wait for Sena’s decision will be made by the party’s central leadership.But then, as they say, politics is an art of the possible. In his speech in Pandharpur, Uddhav opened the door just a little bit when he said: “The issue of an alliance between Sena and BJP will be decided by the people.” What did he exactly mean by that? Only time will tell.
