HAL staff begin indefinite strike from today

‘Management has failed to consider the reasonable demands of unions’

The All-India HAL Trade Unions’ Coordination Committee (AIHALTUCC) passed a resolution on Sunday that it will go ahead with its plan of an indefinite strike from Monday .

The committee held a meeting on Sunday under the chairmanship of Suryadevara Chandrashekar, chief convener of AIHALTUCC.

It passed a resolution that all workmen in HAL divisions across the country will commence the strike as decided earlier. The unions has called for an indefinite strike demanding settlement of wage revision with effect from January 1, 2017.

Mr. Chandrashekar told The Hindu that two rounds of talks with HAL management had broken down.

“The management has failed to consider the fair and reasonable demands of the unions. So, we have decided to go ahead with the indefinite strike in all divisions. The unions had served notice of the strike on September 30,” Mr. Chandrashekar said, adding that more than 20,000 employees will take part in the strike.

Meanwhile, the HAL management, in a release, said that after the unions served notice of the strike call, conciliation proceedings commenced in all locations. It also claimed that labour authorities have advised the unions to desist from holding the strike and come to an amicable solution in consultation with the management.

The management has said a series of meeting were held with representatives of the unions on October 12 and 13.

During the first day, a stock of the issues were settled and a few pending issues were taken up, the statement said.

“The management has also offered to enhance allowances under the cafeteria system at 22% for workmen in Scale-1 to 10, and 20% for workmen in Special Scale as against the uniform rate of 19% offered earlier and also promised that all the workmen will get benefits in terms of allowances on account of introduction of the cafeteria system. On the second day of the negotiations, after deliberations, the management offered a revised rate of fitment benefit at 11%. During the negotiations, the wage negotiation committee also apprised the unions of the ill-effects of resorting to any strike/agitation jeopardising the interest of the employees/ organisation and the nation at large,” the release said.

The release also stated that despite efforts towards an amicable wage settlement, the unions did not accept the offer and decided to resort to the strike.
