Farmers protest on DND flyway ends on second day

The farmers had on Friday warned that they will camp at the site until their demands are met. (Source: ANI)

The farmers protesting near the DND flyway called off the stir on the second day of the agitation after authorities promised them in writing that their demands will be heeded to. “The protest got over around 2.30 pm and farmers have vacated the spot,” Senior Superintendent of Police, Gautam Buddh Nagar, Vaibhav Krishna was quoted as saying by PTI.

“They agreed to leave after they got an assurance in writing from the district magistrate. They have been assured of a meeting in a week with local authorities like Yamuna Expressway Industrial Development Authority (YEIDA) over their grievances,” he added.

It is reported that the situation at DND is now normal and there is no obstruction to traffic movement.

On Friday, farmers had warned that they would camp at the site until their demands were met, leading to traffic snarls all day. Around 600 farmers have come from villages in Agra, Mathura, Meerut, Aligarh, and Ghaziabad, among other regions.

The crowd also included women and children, and protesters could be seen carrying poles, sheets, and mattresses to create makeshift camps. The rally is organised by Kisan Uday Abhiyan, under the leadership of Manveer Teotia.

Farmers protested against land acquisition by BSP govt in 2011

The acquisition of land by BSP supremo Mayawati’s government in Uttar Pradesh was followed by violent protests which claimed four lives including two farmers and two policemen in Greater Noida’s Bhatta Parsaul.

Two years after the protests, the Congress government at the centre introduced Right to Fair Compensation and Transparency in Land Acquisition, Rehabilitation and Resettlement Act, 2013 (better known as Land Acquisition Act, 2013).

The new legislation was aimed at providing “fair compensation” to those whose land is acquired. It also brings transparency to the process of land acquisition and promises rehabilitation of the affected landholders.

(With Inputs from PTI)
