JMB Terror Network In India: NIA IG Alok Mittal Reveals Details

National Investigation Agency (NIA) Inspector General (IG) Alok Mittal addressed a media gathering on October 14, where he revealed sensational in-depth details about the investigations and crackdown on several terror networks in India. During his address, he also spoke about the Bangladeshi terrorist organisation Jamaat-ul-Mujahideen Bangladesh (JMB) and its foothold in India.

READ: NSA Ajit Doval Highlights Three Big Steps To Fight Terrorism

Alok Mittal on JMB network in India

Revealing the details pertaining to the JMB, Mittal highlighted several instances of the terror organisation's presence on Indian soil. Mittal spoke about the 2014 Burdwan blast after the accused was arrested. He added that further investigation revealed the JMB's Bangladesh leadership in India was active since as early as 2007. According to NIA IG, the JMB soon started forming hideouts, initiated recruiting and radicalizing the people and also trained them. The bases were however active in West Bengal and Assam.

"All of it was very systematic, however the bases were operational in West Bengal and Assam." said Alok Mittal.

READ: Amit Shah Talks About The Destruction Caused By Terrorists

Furthermore, Mittal spoke about the 2018 arrest of JMB operative related to Bodh Gaya bombings. He explained that investigations revealed the accused had reportedly fled to Bengaluru. During the course of four years, the JMB set up multiple hideouts. In addition, they also regrouped and plotted attacks. According to NIA, over 20-22 hideouts have been set up in Bengaluru. Apparently, the organization aimed to spread its tentacles across South India.

Weapons testing by JMB

Talking about the weapons testing carried out by JMB, Mittal said that the terrorists even conducted a trial of rocket launchers in Krishnagiri Hills near the Karnataka border.

"The JMB even conducted a trial of rocket launchers in the Krishnagiri hills along the Karnataka border," he said.

READ | Rajnath Singh To Pak PM: Will Send Army To Combat Terror In Pakistan

The JMB has constantly plotted attacks against Buddhist temples in order to take vengeance for the plight of displaced Rohingya Muslims in Myanmar. The NIA has released a list of 125 suspects operating under the JMB. The list has been shared with several states in order to suppress the looming terror threats in India.

READ: JMB's Senior Operative, Asadullah Sheikh Arrested In Chennai

(With Agency Inputs)
