Vadodara: Schoolchildren go without food as Akshaya Patra workers go on flash strike

VADODARA: Children of several government primary schools in Vadodara city and surrounding areas went without their mid-day meal on Monday after workers at the Akshaya Patra kitchen went on a flash strike The workers went on a strike demanding proper treatment for a woman helper working at the kitchen. The woman suffered head injury due to a fall after her sari got pulled into one of the machines in the kitchen on October 6.The woman was initially taken to government hospitals and from there to the Narhari Hospital in the Fatehgunj where she is under treatment. The workers were concerned over her health and approached an outfit working for labours in the city that took up the issue.After representations on Sunday, the outfit gave a strike call on Monday and ensured that food prepared at the kitchen was not delivered after 8am.VMC officials said that the ‘anganwadis’ and morning shifts at primary schools run by the civic body were provided food, but the schools in the second shift could not. Officials added that Akshaya Patra had roped in a contractor to provide the workforce for its operations. VMC has shot a letter to the organisation seeking an explanation for food not being provided on Monday.Akshaya Patra functionaries informed both the district administration as well as the VMC regarding the issue and held meetings with them. “We are concerned about the helper and a leading neurosurgeon is supervising her treatment. We can consider shifting her to a different hospital, but for that the opinion of the doctors would be required. Our senior functionaries have also rushed to the city and are trying to resolve the issue,” said Sudhir Singh, who manages Akshaya Patra’s Vadodara operations.Apart from ‘anganwadis’, Akshaypatra provides food to 624 schools in Vadodara city and district. Over 400 schools could not be provided food on Monday due to the flash strike. Singh said that attempts were being made to rope in drivers to ensure that the food was delivered on time on Tuesday.
