Army Chief General Bipin Rawat bats for synergy with NIA to tackle security threats, better conviction rate

Army Chief General Bipin Rawat. | Photo Credit: ANI

Key Highlights General Rawat was addressing Army Commanders and staff at the Army Commander’s Conference in New Delhi on Tuesday

New Delhi: Indian Army Chief General Bipin Rawat on Tuesday stressed on the importance of working closely with the National Investigation Agency to crack down on anti-national elements and forces that work with the motive to destabilise peace and harmony in the country.

The Army Chief stressed on the need for a synergy between the armed forces and the investigating agency to reinforce the resolve to fight terrorism and anti-national activities.

“There has been an effective and large number of convictions and this could happen due to synergy among the security forces and the agencies. Such synergy with the law enforcing agencies will be reinforced,” Army Chief General Bipin Rawat said.

General Rawat was addressing Army Commanders and staff at the Army Commander’s Conference in New Delhi on Tuesday, where he also spoke about operational readiness, effective conduct and well synergised operational readiness of the Indian Army.

Army Chief General Bipin Rawat on National Investigation Agency (NIA): There has been effective and large number of convictions and this could happen due to synergy among the security forces and the agencies. Such synergy with the law enforcing agencies will be reinforced. https://t.co/Q3SBLlOwl7 pic.twitter.com/gOHZDtX6Lx — ANI (@ANI) October 15, 2019

Earlier in the day, the Army Chief called for better inclusion of indigenous technology in the armed forces and said that India will fight and win the next war, if and when it happens, with home-grown solutions.

“If we are looking at the contours of future warfare, it may not necessarily be contact warfare. So, there is a realm of non-contact warfare. We need to start looking at the development of cyberspace, space, laser, electronic warfare and robotics...and, along with that Artificial Intelligence... And, if we do not start thinking on it now, it will be too late,” news agency PTI quoted General Rawat as saying.

National Security Advisor Ajit Doval also today emphasised on the need to have modern technological advancements to equip security forces for better combat readiness.

“Either you’re better than your adversaries or you're not there at all. In the modern world, technology and money are two things which will influence geopolitics. Who will win, will depend upon who has preponderance over their adversaries on these two. Of the two, technology is more important,” Doval said at the 41st DRDO Directors Conference.
