Singapore and its relations with a new South-east Asia

It was in the British interest to encourage cooperation between Malays and Chinese, but the long-term effect of Singapore's separation from its hinterland was clear to the Japanese.

When they renamed it Shonan in 1942, the only place given a Japanese name, they saw Singapore island as the region's imperial base. They sought the trust of the Malay-Indonesian world and helped the Indians to build the Indian National Army to liberate India from British rule. But they did not trust the Chinese who saw them as the enemy and were willing to fight them together with the British. Thus, although briefly, the different local communities were further separated.

The connections that the British tried to establish from the late 19th century did not work. After World War II, the Malayan Union proposed was not acceptable and the Malayan Communist Party, supported mainly by the Chinese, turned against them.

Also, the Federation of Malaya was not the British Malaya that people in Singapore had hoped for. To Malay leaders, that was always Tanah Melayu, Malay land. While the Malays needed to make concessions to other communities in order to gain the country's independence, they rejected the connections with other races that characterised British Malaya.

In that context, the separation of 1965 should not have been a surprise.

The hasty efforts to connect British Malaya to Greater Malaysia (Malayan peninsula, Singapore plus North Borneo and Sarawak) were more like improvisations and failed to overcome the disparate developments that had made reconnecting difficult time and again.

What was remarkable, however, was that the generations of people in Singapore who lived through the efforts to reconnect seemed to have grasped the idea that being connected to the distant and separate from the near was something they simply had to learn to deal with.

To emphasise Singapore's distinctiveness, the Hong Kong experience is illuminating. Hong Kong's close connections from the start with its China hinterland had led to different kinds of adaptations. Its largely Chinese population never stopped being engaged in all of China's affairs. It could be argued that they had balanced two systems under the shadow of China. Thus when the British left, that balance was lost and the China connection became overwhelming.

For Singapore, the opposite happened. Separating from the near had given the British full control of the China-British India relationship. By 1965, the people of Singapore had internalised the early imperial linkages. They set out to build on that heritage to seek its place as a global city and turn its plural society into a viable and prosperous state. This was summed up in the idea of "leapfrogging" the region to reach world markets.

There are now new challenges.

Two are obvious. China had learnt that neglecting its south had resulted in its near-collapse. No longer divided and weak, it will not allow its coasts to be vulnerable again. It expects its relationship with Singapore to reflect that understanding.

The other concerns the relations with a new South-east Asia from which Singapore cannot be separate. Singapore has to rebuild connections with its Asean neighbours to enable that organisation to deal with the rivalries involving new great powers. Both challenges require much rethinking, not least about how connecting and separating could be managed under these conditions.

• Wang Gungwu is University Professor at the National University of Singapore. This article is adapted from a presentation made at the Institute of Policy Studies' Singapore Bicentennial Conference held on Sept 30 and Oct 1.
