Punjab And Jammu's Defence Bases Placed Under 'Orange Alert': Reports

After fresh intelligence inputs suggested that a group of terrorist from Pakistan has infiltrated into India, defence parameters in Punjab and Jammu area have been placed on high alert. Government sources said, "The defence bases in and around Punjab and Jammu are on high alert. The Indian Air Force has put its airbases in Punjab including Pathankot and Jammu on an orange alert.” The government sources added reportedly that armed forces received the tip in the early hours of Thursday, October 17, after which all precautions to protect the defence bases are being taken.

READ| JeM Terrorist Arrested In Baramulla; Arms & Ammunition Recovered

Intelligence agencies had issued a warning

A few days ago, the bases were on high alert, as per reports, but the alert levels were brought down a couple of days later, they said. According to sources in the army, there have been reports of a possible terror attack on major defence facilities since August 5, when the Centre moved to abrogate Article 370 that granted a special status to Jammu and Kashmir. Late last month, intelligence agencies had issued a warning against a module of eight to ten Jaish-e-Mohammed (JeM) terrorists. The input suggests that the terror group may possibly try to carry out a suicide attack against air force bases in and around Jammu and Kashmir.

READ| Chargesheet Filed Against 4 JeM Terrorists, Pulwama-type Plot Busted

Jammu and Kashmir Police busted a Jaish-e-Mohammed (JeM) module

On October 7, Jammu and Kashmir Police, busted a Jaish-e-Mohammed (JeM) module arrested a terrorist, who was affiliated to the Pakistan-based organisation. The terrorist was nabbed from north Kashmir's Baramulla district, arms and ammunition were recovered from him. In a press brief by Jammu and Kashmir Police, the DIG said that the terrorist, who had joined JeM on August 30 was caught in a joint operation after a specific intelligence input.

READ| From Kashmir To NIA Probe, Lobby Fearmongering Called Out

A suspected terrorist had been arrested in Haryana

A suspected member of the Jaish-e-Mohammad group had been arrested from a truck on the National Highway at Ambala Cantonment area in Haryana, police said on Saturday, September 28. The terrorist has been identified as Mohammad Ismail, a resident of Jammu and Kashmir, Ambala Superintendent of Police Abhishek Jorwal said. The police received information on the evening of September 27, from Jammu and Kashmir military intelligence and Punjab police that a suspected militant of JeM was passing through Ambala in an apple-laden truck going towards Delhi, the SP said.

READ| Pakistan-Taliban Meet Irks Afghanistan, Questions Legitimacy Of Meet

(INPUTS FROM ANI)
