Close to a breakthrough in Ayodhya?

Jiby writes on politics, developmental issues & legal affairs and enjoys hunting for data to make his arguments. He works on the Edit Page at The Times of India

Reports that the mediation attempts at Ayodhya have achieved a breakthrough with the Sunni Waqf Board and the Nirmohi Akhara, two of three main parties in the Ramjanmabhoomi-Babri Masjid title suit, succeeding in settling their differences offers hope of an end in sight to the intractable dispute. The Sunni Waqf Board has reportedly agreed to drop its claims to the title in exchange for status quo on all other disputed places of worship as they existed on august 15, 1947, repair of 23 mosques in Ayodhya, permission to pray at some mosques under Archaeological Survey of India control, and permission to build what may be a Babri Masjid replica at another spot.

While the Nirmohi Akhara has agreed to these demands, the politically influential VHP-backed Ramjanmabhoomi Nyas didn’t join the mediation attempts. While Jamaat Ulema-i-Hind, another party in the title suit, didn’t join the mediation and is now slamming the Waqf Board it is unlikely that to be a deal breaker unlike the VHP whose political heft has ensured that successive political establishments and judges couldn’t put the dispute in the backburner.

Perhaps, the decision may not even be the VHP’s to make as the entire Sangh Parivar may have to confabulate to arrive at a consensus on the other mandi-masjid disputes in India, especially in Mathura. Nevertheless, the mediation having got this far itself would have surprised many naysayers, this writer included. It would also be interesting to see how the Supreme Court responds to the Waqf Board stance and whether this will influence the judgment.

It is unlikely that SC may put off a judgment at this late stage to iron out the mediation breakthrough. Given the shifting stances of the various parties in the dispute there can be no guarantee that one of the parties in the new settlement may back out in a few days or weeks. Nevertheless, the possibility of the settlement influencing the final judgment cannot be ruled out. It is also interesting that the Nirvani Akhara and Aurobindo Ashram have offered land for a national institute for social harmony.

As the country prepares to put behind it the Ram Mandir agitation and the Babri Masjid demolition, it is in need of more constructive efforts to rebuild the social edifice. If building a grand Ram Mandir and recreating the Babri Masjid and installing a national memorial for harmony can regain the glory and splendor of Ayodhya it is an attempt worth making.

Facebook Twitter Linkedin Email Disclaimer Views expressed above are the author's own.
