Do you see Hindu-Muslim even in unity-integrity issues of country? - PM Modi hits out at Congress over Kashmir

PM Narendra Modi at a rally in Maharashtra | Photo Credit: ANI

Key Highlights PM Modi said that there was no religious colour to the decision to abrogate Article 370 If you want to go to Kashmir let me know, I'll make arrangements - PM Modi said

New Delhi: Prime Minister Narendra Modi, on Friday, said that there was no religious colour to the decision to abrogate Article 370. Hitting out at Congress for claiming that 'had there been Hindus in Kashmir, BJP Government would have never taken this decision', Modi asked the audience- 'Do you see 'Hindu-Muslim' in the unity & integrity of the country?'

"A Congress leader had said, this decision will destroy the country, it's been 3 months, has the country been destroyed? Another Congress leader said that we've lost Kashmir by abrogating Article 370, have we lost Kashmir? If you want to go to Kashmir let me know, I'll make arrangements," Modi said in poll-bound Maharashtra.

"A Congress leader had said that had there been Hindus in Kashmir, BJP Government would have never taken this decision (abrogation of Article 370). Do you see 'Hindu-Muslim' in the unity & integrity of the country?" he further said.

Earlier today, Defence Minister Rajnath Singh also asked the Congress party why they wanted to 'internationalise' the Kashmir issue. "Jammu & Kashmir is an internal matter of India. I want to ask the Congress party, do they want to internationalise the Kashmir issue?" Singh asked during an election rally in Haryana.

The BJP has been projecting abrogation of Article 370 from Jammu and Kashmir as a major success of the government in its election pitches in Maharashtra and Haryana. The two states, with 288 and 90 Assembly seats respectively, go to polls on October 21. The results will be declared on October 24.

The government on August 5, took a decision to abrogate Article 370 and revoked the special status of Jammu and Kashmir. The state has been bifurcated into two union territories — Jammu and Kashmir with a legislative assembly and Ladakh, without one — which will come into existence from October 31.
