Live: ‘Modi is the leader who can take this country forward,’ says Amit Shah

Modi is the leader who can take this country forward: Amit Shah

“To take the country forward, to secure the country, to develop it, we need a capable leader. And that leader is with the BJP, that is Narendra Modi,” said Amit Shah.

This time, we will get more seats in UP than the last time: Amit Shah

Confident about BJP’s victory, Shah said, “I am not worried about the gathbandhan, I know every region of this state, we will get more seats than the last time,” said Amit Shah.

Modi govt through surgical strike, took the revenge of our slain soldiers: Shah

“This is not moni baba’s govt, this is not bhai-bhatija government, this is Modi ji’s government, which through a surgical strike, took the revenge of our slain soldiers,” said Amit Shah.

Want all Rahul Gandhi to clear before the general elections whether he is for Ram temple in Ayodhya or not: Shah

“We want the construction of a grand Ram temple in Ayodhya soon. So, don’t have any doubts, we will make the temple in Ayodhya. Whenever the case goes to court, the Congress tries to stall it. I want all opposition parties and Rahul Gandhi to clear before the general elections whether they are for Ram temple in Ayodhya or not,” said Amit Shah.

Law and order situation in Uttar Pradesh is one of the best in the country: Shah

“The law and order situation in Uttar Pradesh is one of the best in the country,” said Amit Shah in Amroha, Uttar Prades

For Cong, OROP is only Rahul, only Priyanka: Amit Shah

“We brought OROP (One Rank One Pension) for the benefit of the Army, but even Congress brought it. For them , OROP is Only Rahul, Only Priyanka. They just work for the family, we don’t,” said Amit Shah in an apparent dig to Priyanka Gandhi Vadra’s formal entry into politics.

Opposition and Rahul Gandhi were stunned by the budget: Shah

Addressing a rally in Uttar Pradesh, Amit Shah hailed the interim budget and said “the Opposition and Rahul Gandhi were stunned by the budget.”

Rahul Gandhi should clear his stand on Ayodhya: Amit Shah

“Rahul Gandhi should clear his stand on Ayodhya. I can say without doubt that Ram Mandir will be built there,” said Amit Shah.

‘Arch-rivals have come together in UP to fight us, it reflects our power’

“In Uttar Pradesh, arch-rivals (Mayawati-Akhilesh) have come together to fight us. It reflects how powerful we are. All these Gathbandhan people say Modi hataao and Modi says Gareebi hataao. These Gathbandhans and their leaders cannot do anything for the country. Neither will they be able to conduct surgical strikes,” Amit Shah said.

‘We want BJP in Bengal and Odisha’

“Media people will discuss Agustawestland and other scams but they never took note of the 1 lakh crore that was eaten up by the rats in Congress,” Amit Shah said. We want the BJP to come to power in Odisha and Bengal.

‘We came up with direct transfer funds to prevent corruption’

“Rajiv Gandhi had said that he sends Rs 1 from Delhi and by the time it reaches villages it turned to 15 paise. Who ate up all that money?” asked Amit Shah. But we took a note and came up with direct transfer funds, he added.

Entire country came together for ‘gau-mata’: Shah

“Entire country came together for gau-mata (Cow) due to their sentiments,” Amit Shah said.

Our govt made One Rank One Pension a success: Amit Shah

You were in power for 55 years (Congress) but you could not give them the One Rank One Pension plan to people from the Army.

Sonia- Manmohan govt did not do anything for our soldiers: Shah

Since independence, the biggest budget for defence was declared by Piyush Goyal yesterday. Defence should get the best facilities, latest equipments. For 10 years, Sonia- Manmohan Singh government did not do anything for the soldiers of the country.

Do they even know average produce of Kharif or Rabi crop? asks Amit Shah

Yesterday, some Congress leader estimated an average. Do they even know what is the Kharif or Rabi crop average? What kind of department did they run for 55 years that even today farmers are under debt?

‘Wasn’t Oppn happy for people after Budget was presented?’

Why did they (opposition) look upset when the budget was being presented, weren’t they happy for the people? asked Amit Shah.
