Heavy showers inundate several parts of Mangaluru

FISHERMEN WARNED

MANGALURU: A sudden spell of heavy rains like a cloudburst that hit Mangaluru the city on Friday left several low- lying residential areas and roads inundated. The rains also inundated Mangaluru Central Railway station premises which was under knee-deep water again like it had happened three months back.The Friday’s rain only left the concourse area outside waterlogged, the main platform and various offices inside the railway station were spared, barring the railway mail service premises with staff struggling to keep the parcels dry. The cause of this waterlogging was the open trench dug for UGD network on station premises. The passengers had to wade through knee-deep water to get into the platform. Railway services were not affected.Many areas in the city, especially roads in the low-lying Kodialguthu area, were under water for about an hour. The rains that started with ferocity at 12 noon lasted for over three hours. The waterlogging was seen till 3pm. The stretch between KS Rao Road and SCDCC Bank was also waterlogged causing trouble for both pedestrians and vehicular traffic. The blocked drain connecting the opposite sides of the road was said to be the cause of waterlogging.The Kodialguthu West road was badly affected after the storm water drain overflowed. This area has several apartment complexes and all the basements were in knee-deep water, which receded after 3pm.As on Friday, the district had received 39mm of rainfall with Puttur and Belthangady taluks receiving the highest at 48mm and 43 mm respectively. Sullia received the least at 22mm. Bantwal and Mangaluru taluks received 40mm and 42mm respectively.Last year the district had received 242mm of rainfall for the 18 days of October month, with the month’s rainfall average being 233 mm. This year the October month received 196mm. As far as the ten month rainfall statistics is concerned, the district received 3774mm of rainfall and last year it was 4555mm, with the normal rainfall till December being 3806mm.: The Indian Meteorological Department has warned fishermen against venturing into the sea for the next two days due to depression in Arabian Sea and Lakshadweep Islands. The KSNMDC has issued Orange alert stating that there were chances of the coast receiving heavy rain up to 115mm in the next two days.
