President Kovind: 'India-Philippines Committed To Eliminate Terror'

President Ram Nath Kovind on Friday said that both India and the Philippines will work together to destroy and eliminate terrorism.

India and Philippines committed to work closely together to defeat and eliminate terrorism in all its forms and manifestations. — President of India (@rashtrapatibhvn) October 18, 2019

While on a 7-day visit to the Philippines and Japan, President Ram Nath Kovind participated in delegation-level talks with the President of Philippines Rodrigo Duterte in the Philippines on Friday, October 18. During the talks, both the countries signed agreements about maritime domain, security, tourism, science and technology, and culture.

President Kovind leads delegation level talks with President Duterte of Philippines. India and Philippines sign four agreements covering maritime domain, security, tourism, science and technology and culture. pic.twitter.com/m0vQTHrGeg — President of India (@rashtrapatibhvn) October 18, 2019

Both the leaders also addressed a joint press gathering and spoke about the discussions in the delegation-level meeting. President Kovind also welcomed the initiative of the Philippines to explore its pre-colonial linkages with India. Both countries will set up a group of experts to research & document their ancient ties. Laguna copper plate inscription discovered in the Philippines bears the influence of Pallava script.

While discussing tourism Ram Nath Kovind emphasized how India is one of the fastest-growing source countries for tourists to the Philippines. Adding to the growth of tourism he added that both sides are soon planning to start direct flights, which will give a boost to the connectivity.

READ | Philippine President Rodrigo bruised, scratched from motorcycle fall

President Ram Nath Kovind to visit Japan

President Ram Nath Kovind will be arriving in Tokyo on October 21. While in Japan, he will be attending the enthronement ceremony of Japan's Emperor Naruhito on October 22 where he will be joined by eminent personalities like Britain’s Prince Charles and Chinese Vice-President Wang Qishan. According to officials, about 80 world leaders are expected at the ceremony and banquets, which will be held over two days. Royal families of the UK, Netherlands, Belgium, and Saudi Arabia are also among the invitees due to attend. During his visit to Japan, the President is not scheduled to attend any official bilateral talks but he is expected to attend both the court banquet hosted by Emperor Naruhito and Empress Masako and a state banquet hosted by the Japanese PM Shinzo Abe.

READ | Japan: Emperor Naruhito all set for enthronement after Typhoon Hagibis

READ | President Ram Nath Kovind holds bilateral talks with President Duterte

READ | President Kovind leaves for Philippines and Japan on seven-day visit
