Alleging threat to life, Hindu Samaj Party leader Kamlesh Tiwari had asked for security in 2018

Kamlesh Tiwari, a Hindu Samaj Party leader who was killed in broad daylight in Lucknow, had asked for security in 2018 alleging threat to his life. In 2018, Kamlesh Tiwari had written to the principal secretary in the home department of the Uttar Pradesh government, alleging threat to his life since 2016.

In his letter to the principal secretary, Kamlesh Tiwari had requested the government to provide him security as he had been receiving death threats ever since his remarks on Prophet Muhammad, the last messenger of God, according to Islamic history.

In 2015, Kamlesh Tiwari, who was in his mid-forties, first made headlines when he allegedly made objectionable remarks against Prophet Muhammad, which created a huge uproar and resulted in massive protests by Muslims across the country. He had also posted inflammatory comments on social media.

In 2018, Kamlesh Tiwari, in his letter to the principal secretary, referred to the remarks and claimed a threat to his life. He also wrote to Uttar Pradesh Chief Minister Yogi Adityanath in 2017 and claimed to have received threats from various Muslim clerics.

He had written, "I have been receiving death threats from the Muslim clerics; Fatwas have also been issued against me. A Muslim had once forcefully entered a Hindu Samaj Party programme in Aminabad in Uttar Pradesh. While the police had arrested him, the man was released later."

"The matter is related to my remarks on Azam Khan's [of Samajwadi Party] comment on Prophet Muhammad. I request to at least deploy five guards for my security," Kamlesh Tiwari had said.

According to reports, the attackers, wearing saffron clothes, walked into Tiwari's office in Khurshid Bagh area on the pretext of handing over a box of sweets. Soon after walking in, the assailants opened the box, took out the firearm and sprayed Kamlesh Tiwari with bullets, slashed his throat and fled.

The Lucknow Police has registered an FIR on the complaint of Kamlesh Tiwari’s wife against two maulanas from Bijnor in Uttar Pradesh. In her complaint, Kamlesh Tiwari's wife said that the maulanas two had threatened to kill her husband in 2016.

Kamlesh Tewari is the fourth right-wing leader killed in one month. On October 8, BJP leader Chaudhary Yashpal Singh was gunned down in a similar manner in Deoband. On October 10, another BJP leader, Kabir Tiwari was shot dead in Basti. Two days later, BJP corporator Dhara Singh was gunned down by unidentified assailants in Deoband in Saharanpur.

Deputy Chief Minister Dinesh Sharma on Friday met the family members of Kamlesh Tiwari where the deceased leader's supporters raised slogans against him.

Speaking to India Today TV, Dinesh Sharma said, "The demands of Kamlesh Tiwari's family would be fulfilled. Security and an ex-gratia would also be given to Tiwari's family. The authorities have been directed to arrest the accused as soon as possible."

Union Defence Minister Rajnath Singh also dialled the DGP and the DM and directed them to arrest the accused in the Kamlesh Tiwari murder case.

Former Madhya Pradesh Chief Minister Shivraj Singh Chouhan also reacted to the murder and said, "The assassination of Hindu Samaj Party national president Kamlesh Tiwari is a murder of ideas. There is an attempt to suppress a particular class. It will not be tolerated. I am confident that the culprits will be caught soon and punished severely, so that fear instils in these demons who committed such a heinous crime."

A Special Investigation Team (SIT) has been constituted in the Kamlesh Tiwari murder case. The team comprises IG Lucknow SK Bhagat, SP Crime Dinesh Puri, and Deputy SP PK Mishra.

(With inputs from Himanshu Mishra, Nelanshu Shukla, Ravish Pal Singh)
