Rain for 3 hours leaves many areas of city waterlogged

Mangaluru: A sudden spell of heavy rain , like a cloud burst, that lashed the city on Friday, left several low-lying residential areas and roads waterlogged The rain caused the Mangaluru Central Railway station premises to get waterlogged, which was up to knee depth, like it had happened three months back.Friday’s rain only left the concourse area outside the station waterlogged, but the main platform and various offices inside the railway station were spared, barring the Railway Mail Service premises, with staff struggling to keep parcels dry.The waterlogging was caused by the open trench dug for the UGD network on the station premises. Passengers had to wade through knee-deep water to get into the platform. Railway services were not affected.Many areas in the city, especially roads in the low-lying Kodialguthu area were under water for about an hour. The heavy rain that started at noon lasted for three hours.Waterlogging was there till 3pm. The stretch between KS Rao Road and SCDCC Bank was also waterlogged, making it difficult for both pedestrians and vehicle users. The blocked drain connecting the opposite sides of the road was said to have caused waterlogging.The Kodialguthu West Road was badly affected after the stormwater drain overflowed. This area has several apartment complexes and all the basements were in knee-deep water, which receded after 3 pm. Water entered several houses in Hoige Bazaar As on Friday, the district had received 39mm of rainfall with Puttur and Belthangady taluks receiving the highest at 48mm and 43 mm, respectively.Sullia received the least rain at 22mm. Bantwal and Mangaluru taluks received 40mm and 42mm rain, respectively.Last year, the district had received 242mm of rainfall for 18 days in October , with the month’s rainfall average being 233 mm. This year in October, 196mm rain has been received so far. As far as the 10-month rainfall statistics are concerned, the district received 3,774mm of rain, and last year it was 4,555mm, with the normal rainfall till December being 3,806mm.Fishermen warnedThe Indian Meteorological Department has issued a warning to fishermen not to venture into the sea for the next two days due to depression in the Arabian Sea and Lakshadweep Islands.The KSNMDC has issued an orange alert, stating that there were chances of the coast receiving heavy rain up to 115mm in the next two days.
