Hizbul posters warn students against appearing for exams

SRINAGAR: In an apparent move to endanger the future of thousands of students, Hizbul Mujahideen posters warning them against appearing for their annual exams were put up near schools across the Kashmir Valley on Saturday. The posters were quickly removed, police said.Hizb terrorists have even placed second locks on the gates of several schools in HMT area on the outskirts of Srinagar , reports said.More than 40,000 students are set to appear for the Class-10 exam while for Class-12, 48,000 are scheduled to write their papers. As many as 615 centres for Class-10 and 433 for Class-12 have already been set up. The fresh warnings to students have sent shivers down the spines of parents.J&K government has announced the dates for the exams, which will conclude by November-end. The Board of School Education (BOSE) has even issued the exam date-sheets, its chairperson said.Besides, the Hizb posters also asked fruit-growers to expedite apple collection and hasten sale of their produce, and warned politicians against participating in the block development council (BDC) polls starting October 24. In Shopian district , out of eight blocks, elections are going to be held only in two — Kellar and Shopian. In the entire Kashmir Valley, BDC elections are scheduled to be conducted in 25 blocks out of 137.In mid-September, Hizb terrorists had warned fruit-growers to not collect their produce and not send the same to mandis outside the Valley. Following defiance by the growers, the terrorists now seemed to have softened their position, a police officer said.A fruit trader, a fruit truck driver and a brick-kiln worker (all non-locals) were killed by terrorists on October 15. This created fear among non-local fruit buyers, fruit transporters and labourers. Following these killings, state authorities had established safe houses for outside fruit buyers and truck drivers.Police have, however, stopped around 2,300 truckloads of fruits along the Mughal Road connecting Shopian with Rajouri due to terror threat, sources said.
