Rural police act to avoid Mulshi Pattern in polls

Of 2,766 cases, 410 are from Paud; cops say Mulshi has most criminals who can jeopardise elections



Pune rural police are not taking any chance in the run-up to the Monday’s Assembly election with several preventive actions like externing historysheeters in place for peaceful polls. Considering possible influence on voters from various gang members, the Pune rural police have also taken action against a number of goons in the district. Incidentally, it has revealed that most of the criminals belong to the Mulshi area, about 40 km west of the city.



As a preventive measure, the Pune rural police have taken action against 410 criminals on record till October 19. Of 2,766 cases, 410 are from Paud police station alone. Rest of the cases belong to 30 other police stations that come under the jurisdiction of Pune rural police.



People with a history of body offences and crimes during past elections, including local and Assembly polls, were on the police radar. Considering the role of criminals during the polls, a series of actions, including preventive detention, arrests and cases under the Maharashtra Control of Organised Crime Act (MCOCA) and Maharashtra Prevention of Dangerous Activities (MPDA) Act were initiated by the police.



Inspector Ashok Dhumal, who is in charge of Paud police station having jurisdiction of over 40 villages in Mulshi taluka, said, “Considering the high ratio of criminals on record, we have taken preventive steps to avoid any issue of law and order during Assembly elections. We have taken action against 104 criminals under section 107 of the Code of Criminal Procedure (CrPC). Similarly, some 11 have been charged under section 109 of CrPC. We have taken bonds from them for good behaviour during the polls. At least 40 people have been implicated under section 110 of CrPC in which we took security bonds from them as well for good behaviour. They all are habitual offenders,” said Dhumal.



“As per record, 141 gang members have been detained under section 149 of CrPC to prevent possible cognisable offences from them. Total 107 criminals on record have been externed from the jurisdiction of Pune district under section 144 of CrPC. Other 17 are also detained as a preventive action under various sections. Apart from this, we have also taken action against those who are in illegal business like illicit liquor, gambling, illegal lottery among others,” Dhumal added.



Pune rural police superintendent Sandeep Patil said, “Considering the polls, we have taken action against 2,766 criminals in total. We have also evoked the MPDA against two criminals and five gangs have been booked under the MCOCA. As per last records, total 19 gang members have been externed from the district with most of them from Mulshi and surrounding areas.” Asked about security preparations for the elections, Patil added, “We will ensure that a fair election is conducted. We will continue combing operations and nakabandi to avoid any untoward incident.”


