Liquor, tobacco banned in this Gujarat tribal village

faced resistance against ban

VADODARA: Not offering a lavish spread of specially brewed country liquor, bidis, cigarettes and 'mavas' to guests during wedding was considered blasphemous in this far-flung tribal village of Chhota Udepur . Locals and guests drank as if there was no tomorrow and wildly swayed to DJ tunes.However, for over a year now, weddings have suddenly become a sober and dry affair in Bhekhadiya , a village of just about 1,100 people. Hosts don't dare to make 'special arrangements' for their guests. Forget liquor, they even fear offering tobacco products during the functions now. And those who do so not only face mass social boycott and hefty fine but are also subjected to the ignominy of rendering a public apology.Bhekhadiya has passed a resolution that any person found consuming liquor, tobacco or any intoxicating substances will be ostracised, slapped a fine and tender a public apology.Villagers say the fun and sanctity of marriage functions often got disrupted due to drunk guests and locals who indulged in uncivilized behaviour. "We thought enough is enough. The intention of banning liquor and tobacco was not just to change the behaviour of guests coming for the social functions but also to take ensure their good health," said village elder Ratan Bhagat.In fact, a board at the village's entrance warns liquor addicts from entering the village about the consequences of having liquor and tobacco. "Earlier, there used to be plates brimming with 'mavas', bidis and cigarettes making rounds for guests in the weddings. Not just the elders, but young boys had also started consuming them," added Bhagat.Bhekhadiya’s sarpanch Milan Rathwa said the consumption of liquor and tobacco not only affects health, but was a huge drag on the finances of people, most of whom are small and marginal farmers.So far, the villagers have boycotted three weddings as the hosts were found consuming liquor and tobacco. They have fined seven liquor addicts Rs 1,000 each and have made them write an apology letter with a promise that they won’t consume liquor in the future.Imposing the ban was not easy. The gram panchayat had to face stiff resistance from the shops selling tobacco and those running liquor dens in the vicinity. Sarpanch Milan Rathwa said that they counselled the shop owners that human life was more precious than their profits and earning. “Those who did not agree despite counselling were ultimately warned them that if they don’t stop selling tobacco products, the gram panchayat will involve police to enforce the ban,” said Rathwa.
