Maharashtra election: Fear of low turnout, nearly 40 BJP & Sena rebels in the fray

Congress-NCP banks on co-op sector network

MUMBAI: The ruling BJP-Shiv Sena appears to have an edge over a badly mauled opposition, but rebellion could affect the saffron alliance’s chances in nearly 40 constituencies in the state assembly elections , said political analysts. In all, 8.97 crore voters will choose from 3,237 candidates in 288 constituencies across the state on Monday.“While BJP has humbled the Congress-NCP by encouraging large-scale defections, it faces stiff opposition from the Sena, and the Sena from BJP rebels in many constituencies. This is a strange situation. Nature doesn’t like a vacuum, even in politics,” said a former bureaucrat.The ruling alliance will be worried about whether agrarian distress, the state administration’s handling of the recent floods in parts of the state or the fallout of the PMC Bank scam and the overall economic slowdown may bring down its numbers. Its other worry is a low turnout—due to voter fatigue following the April-May Lok Sabha polls and the apparent lack of a serious contest in the assembly poll—in Mumbai, Pune and other cities, which it is confident of sweeping and where its talk on revoking Article 370 is intended to have maximum effect.The Congress-NCP too would be dreading depleted voting numbers: In parts of western Maharashtra, Marathwada and Vidarbha, where it is anxious to make a comeback, fewer voters coming out may mean ‘Advantage Incumbent’.PM Modi brought up the point at his rally at BKC when he said, “Don’t go to Gujarat, Goa or don’t think of going to Pune to meet your relatives. On Monday, queue up before the nearest polling booth and cast your vote.”Shorn of poll rhetoric, this campaign was chiefly centred around CM Devendra Fadnavis and Sharad Pawar. This reflects the big changes in state politics, said a chronicler. “While Fadnavis offers to voters a heady brew of technology and patriotism, Pawar represents the Nehruvian era steeped in consensual politics and collective leadership.”Fadnavis and Pawar campaigned vigorously across the state, in contrast with the Congress’s lacklustre campaign, which the NCP fears may hurt the opposition combine’s attempts to fight back.Intra-party revolt has come as a jolt to all parties, especially the BJP-Sena alliance because it is in power. The BJP in Mumbai denied nomination to three seniors: ministers Vinod Tawde and Prakash Mehta and former minister Raj Purohit. Mehta’s supporters went on a rampage in Ghatkopar, demanding ticket to their leader. Two days later, Mehta fell in line. However, despite attempts by Matoshree, Rajul Patel, the Sena rebel, continues to lock horns with Bharati Lavekar, the official ‘yuti’ candidate in Versova. Similarly, Trupti Sawant, Sena’s sitting MLA, is contesting against Mumbai Vishwanath Mahadeshwar, Sena’s official nominee in Bandra (East).In all, rebels from the saffron camp are taking on the alliance’s official candidates in 37 constituencies across the state. This may raise opposition hopes or even result in more Independents getting elected, said analysts.In Pune, a Sena rebel is crossing swords with Mukta Tilak, Pune mayor and BJP candidate in Kasba, a BJP bastion. In the Kothrud pocketborough of Pune, state BJP chief Chandrakant Patil faces rough weather because of internecine squabbling and because Congress-NCP and other opposition parties have backed Kishore Shinde, the MNS candidate.The Congress-NCP combine is, in western Maharashtra, hoping to profit from its yet robust networking in the cooperative sector.Having bagged 44 of 62 seats in Vidarbha in the 2014 assembly polls, the BJP, this time around, faces a challenge from rebels here. Also, the Sena, which was keen on deepening its roots in the region, is not happy with its measly share of 12 seats. In Ramtek, Yeotmal, Umarkhed, Hinganghat, Bhandara and Washim constituencies, BJP candidates are being opposed by Sena rebels, while in Gondia, Buldhana, Daryapur, Arni and Tumsur, BJP faces intra-party revolt.The BJP-Sena are working at odds in nine of the 35 constituencies in northern Maharashtra, it is learned, while in 2 (Sakri and Shirpur), BJP is wracked by internal dissension. In Yeola in Nashik, former deputy CM Chhagan Bhujbal is locked in a fierce poll combat with Sena’s Sambhaji Pawar.The BJP projected Fadnavis as its poster boy praised by both Modi and BJP president Amit Shah. Both said Fadnavis was set to get a second term as CM.The election will determine the political future of bigwigs, including Fadnavis, ex-CMs Prithviraj Chavan and Ashok Chavan (both Congress), state BJP chief Chandrakant Patil, NCP heavyweights Chhagan Bhujbal, Ajit Pawar, Jayant Patil and Dilip Walse-Patil, and senior ministers, including Pankaja Munde, Girish Mahajan, Ashish Shelar (all BJP), Eknath Shinde (Sena) and Radhakrishna Vikhe-Patil, the former state Congress president who migrated to BJP and won a ministership in the Fadnavis regime, triggering more defections from Congress to BJP.Marathwada may go the BJP-Sena way as Congress-NCP failed to take on the ruling alliance on issues such as drought and water scarcity, it is said.Former Congress CM Ashok Chavan is said to be in a strong position in Nanded, while Amit Deshmukh and his brother Dhiraj of Congress seem set to retain Latur, the family bastion nurtured by their father, the late Vilasrao Deshmukh. In Beed, it’s a Munde-versus-Munde fight with BJP minister Pankaja Munde contesting against cousin, Dhananjay, an NCP leader.In coastal Konkan, the big fight is between Nitesh Rane (BJP) and Sena’s Satish Sawant in Kankavli. The Sena is miffed with Fadnavis for opening BJP’s doors for ex-CM Narayan Rane, Nitesh’s father. The Sena considers the Ranes its principal political rivals in Konkan. In Raigad district, a BJP rebel has filed nomination papers against Manohar Bhoir, the Sena nominee.The BJP is contesting 164 of the total 288 seats, while the Sena's tally is 124, the party's lowest in the saffron alliance’s 25 years of poll partnership, a clear indication that Sena has been reduced to a junior partner in the ‘yuti’ and that Matoshree’s plan to form a government on its own remains a distant dream.The BJP seems inching closer to the late Pramod Mahajan's gameplan of ‘shat pratishat BJP’, 100% growth of the party in Maharashtra.Uddhav Thackeray agreed to play second fiddle to BJP in order to retain Sena’s share in power in absence of which he fears a split in the party. At the Dussehra conclave in Mumbai this month, he made it clear to his followers he preferred power to rough and ready politics of the past.
