BJP wants to convert secular India into Zia's Pak: Mehbooba

BJP wants to convert secular India into Zia's Pak: Mehbooba

SRINAGAR, Dec 31: Reacting to controversial triple talaq bill, former chief minister and PDP president, Mehbooba Mufti today asserted that BJP wants to convert Gandhi’s secular India into Zia-ul-Haq’s Pakistan by interfering into religious matters of Muslims.

Addressing a press conference at her Gupkar residence here, Mehbooba said that by bringing the controversial bill, the BJP does not serve India nor Hindu community but creating division on religious lines.

She warned of the serious consequences incase BJP continue to interfere in religious matters of Muslims.

“I want to tell the Centre that you don’t serve either India or your Hindus with this onslaught. We don’t want to create Zia-ul-Haq’s Pakistan in Gandhi’s secular India. Being a Muslim woman and having gone through a broken marriage it is my responsibility to talk about the issue,” Mehbooba said, warning that BJP should “not interfere in religion, if you do so you will face consequences.”

The PDP President, while accusing the BJP government of creating a divide on religious and sectarian lines, said that introducing triple talaq bill is an assault on the family structure of Muslim community.

She alleged that BJP by introducing Triple Talaq bill has barged into the lives of Muslims which will affect family life of community severally.

Terming Triple Talaq (Biddat) “unconventionality” in Sharia, she said this exercise stands rejected in Islam and Supreme Court has also annulled it.

“Marriage in Muslims is a contract, deserting women and leaving her destitute is bad but if the two do not wish to live together they can part ways with mutual understating. After introducing Triple Talaq bill they have barged into our houses which severally disturbs our family life,” added Mehbooba.

She said that in eastern societies, the Hindus, Muslims and Sikhs have strong family structures and bonding compared to the western culture.

Mehbooba alleged that BJP has also resorted to economic onslaught on Muslims who were working as labourers and wage earners by imposing ban on leather and beef in India.

The former CM said that BJP rejects any kind of reservations for Muslim community be it their education or jobs but remains on forefront when it comes to laws like Triple Talaq.

“When we talk with BJP about Muslim reservation they reject any kind of reservation whether education or jobs or on religious lines but they are on forefront when it comes to this kind of law,” said PDP President.

She also said that not a single Muslim parliamentarian supported BJP’s bill on Triple Talaq instead they abide by Apex Court ruling be it on this particular issue or that of the Babri Masjid.

She accused BJP of disrespecting Supreme Court ruling saying they do want to comply with court decision but want to go ahead with the construction of Ram Mandir in Ayodhya.

“They don’t respect Supreme Court decision on Babri Masjid and overtly say that whatever decision the Supreme Court takes we will go with construction of Mandir in Ayodhya. On the other hand, Muslims are really obedient; they obey SC ruling on Triple Talaq or Babri Masjid,” she said.
