Kerala rains: Schools, colleges to remain closed in Ernakulam on Tuesday

Kerala rains: Schools, colleges to remain closed in Ernakulam on Tuesday

A red warning has been issued in 7 districts in the state for Monday due to heavy rainfall.

news Kerala rains

As rains continue to batter the district, schools and colleges (including professinal colleges) in Ernakulam will remain closed on Tuesday. The announcement was made by the Ernakulam district collector on Monday.

Meanwhile, seven districts in Kerala have been issued a red warning on Monday. A red warning issued by the India Meteorological Department (IMD) urges authorities to “take action”.

As per the India Meteorological Department (IMD) forecast, the districts of Thiruvananthapuram, Alappuzha, Kottayam, Ernakulam Idukki, Thrissur and Palakkad are very likely to receive extremely heavy rainfall on Monday, October 21. An orange warning, which denotes “be alert or be prepared”, was issued to these districts on Sunday which has now been changed to red.

Orange warnings too have been issued to the districts of Kollam, Pathanamthitta, Malappuram, Kozhikode and Wayanad. Isolated heavy showers are forecasted by the IMD in these districts.

Speaking to TNM, an official from the Kerala state disaster management authority said, "Relief centres are being set up now as the Northeast monsoon showers have just begun from October 20. So far, 5 relief centres have been set up in Ernakulam and we are in the process of setting up more in other districts." Among the relief centres, two have been set up in the Kanayannur taluk and one in Kochi taluk.

Trains cancelled, partially cancelled

Several trains were cancelled or partially cancelled due to waterlogging.

Train No.16791-Tirunelveli-Palakkad Palaruvi will be terminated at Mulanturuthi and the train stands partially cancelled between Mulanturuti and Palakkad.

Train no 16650 Nagercoil Mangalore Parasuram will be terminated at Kuruppanthara and the train partially cancelled between Kuruppanthara and Mangalore.

Trains 16302 (Thiruvananthapuram-Shoranur Venad Express) and 16301 (Shoranur - Thiruvananthapuram Venad Express) will be short terminated at Piravam Road with the train services being partially cancelled between Shoranur and Piravam Road.

Train no-22639 Chennai - Alappuzha Express will be terminated at Angamali and Train No.22640 Alappuzha - Chennai and stands partially cancelled between Alappuzha and Angamali.

Train No 10215 Madgaon- Ernakulam Express and Train No.10216 Ernakulam-Madgaon Express is partially cancelled between Chalakkudi and Ernakulam Jn.

Train No.12082 Thiruvananthapuram-Kannur Janshatabdi of 21.10.19 is fully cancelled.

The Kollam-Ernakulam Passenger will be short terminated at Thripunithura. Janshatabdi(12076) has been short terminated at Alappuzha, Guruvayur Express (16127) has been short terminated at Ernakulam Jn. Bengaluru Intercity (12678) is rescheduled to leave Ernakulam Jn. at 11:30, Mangala Express (12617) is rescheduled at 13:00 hrs. Thiruvananthapuram Chandigarh Sampark Kranti (12217) is diverted to run via via Kayamkulam- Kottayam-Ernakulam Town. Train no 16346 Thiruvananthapuram - Lokmanyatilak Netravathi will run diverted via Kayamkulam- Kottayam-Ernakulam

Rains and flooding affect polling

Several areas in Eranakulam saw heavy flooding on Monday, even as the polling in the Ernakulam bye-elections was underway. Rains temporarily affected the polling operations in some booths.

"So far waterlogging has affected 5-10 polling stations in Ernakulam. We have shifted those booths to a nearby location and I have instructed all the officials including the returning officer and the district collector to make all the arrangements. The timing for casting vote can be extended even after 6 pm. If there is no other option, then we will check the reports of the returning officers and give the option of repolling in the select stations where no activity took place," Teeka Ram Meena, Chief Electoral Officer of Kerala told the media.

Waterlogging in arterial roads such as MG Road, Ernakulam North and Menaka led to bottlenecks in these areas.

Regions in Elamkulam, Poonithura, Edapally North, Edapally South, Cheranalloor, Thrikkakara and various areas of West Kochi like Chullickal, Palluruthy and Thoppumpady have been inundated.

As per reports of IMD, regions near Kochi airport received a rainfall of 160.4 mm on Monday morning.
