India vs Pakistan: Indian army accuses Pakistan of breaking ceasefire after 'shots fired'

Kashmir: Civilians mourn losses after cross-border attacks

top stories direct to your inbox SUBSCRIBE Invalid email Sign up to receive our rundown of the day'sdirect to your inbox We use your sign-up to provide content in ways you've consented to and to improve our understanding of you. This may include adverts from us and 3rd parties based on our understanding. You can unsubscribe at any time. More info

Pakistani troops were accused of breaking the terms 2003 truce in the trouble-torn region by shelling civilian areas of Shahpur Kerni in Poonch district. The claims follow allegations of Indian ceasefire violations by Pakistani foreign minister Shah Mahmood Qureshi. Mr Qureshi said he condemned India’s aggression at the Line of Control (LoC) and warned New Delhi was putting peace in the region at risk.

Both sides have blamed the other for the violence and claim they retaliated only after the other violated the truce which has been in place for 16 years. The latest round of shelling occurred in the border villages of Titwal and Tangdhar in Kashmir's Kupwara district but both sides provided differing accounts of what happened. India accused Pakistan of targeting civilians and killing one man and injuring three others.

Indian troops on patrol in Kashmir

Indian troops have been accused of breaking the 2003 ceasefire in Kashmir

Indian troops take up positions in Kashmir

Indian Army chief General Bipin Rawat said his troops retaliated by targeting militants and killing at least six Pakistani soldiers and destroying three camps. But Pakistan's army spokesman Major General Asif Ghafoor said it was India that had violated the ceasefire and "deliberately targeted civilians". He said nine Indian soldiers were killed and several injured when his troops returned fire. Mr Qureshi accused India of lying and said it was not allowing the world to see what was happening inside Kashmir over the last two months.

Trending

The nuclear-armed neighbours have already fought two wars and a limited conflict over Kashmir but this year tensions between the rivals sharply intensified. In February, India launched air strikes against militants in Pakistani territory in response to a suicide attack in Kashmir which killed 40 Indian soldiers. The Pakistan-based Jaish-e-Mohammad (JeM) claimed responsibility for the deadly attack.

Pakistan has been blamed for the latest cross-border violence in Kashmir
