How Indian museums are using AV to preserve history

Ahead of UN World Day for Audiovisual Heritage, we look at the different ways museums preserve the past through sight and sound

During his presentations on Mahatma Gandhi, A Annamalai, the Director of National Gandhi Museum (NGM), Delhi, often asks the audience: “Do you think the textile mill workers were happy with Gandhi when he visited them in Lancashire in 1931?”

“They usually respond, ‘No’. Since the Indian National Congress had called for the boycott of British goods that led to the closure of textile mills, the audience feels Gandhi wouldn’t have been welcomed. So, I show them the video of Gandhi being cheered by the textile mill workers. The audience is surprised and see for themselves what really happened,” says Annamalai, adding that the audiovisual presentations help him construct an image of Gandhi for the younger generation.

October 27 is the World Day for Audiovisual (AV) Heritage, instituted by UNESCO to create awareness on the significance of heritage preservation of this nature, to clear the misconception that museums are static. Vijayawada’s Bapu Museum has adopted AR and VR with AV elements to engender participation from visitors. But let us talk classic audio-visual heritage; it is far less manufactured and delineates authentic preservation culture of classic media forms.

Annamalai vouches for the medium. In addition to documents, photographs, and objects, NGM has 100 hours of recordings related to Gandhi, including AK Chettiar’s 1941 documentary Mahatma Gandhi – 20th Century Prophet.

For a long time, Chettiar’s film was untraceable. It was available in its original 15 MM format but couldn’t be screened as the format had become redundant. The film was digitised in 2014 in 4K.

The National Gandhi Museum in Delhi | Photo Credit: Special Arrangement

The Partition Museum in Amritsar has hundreds of stories of its survivors. “We have collected thousands of oral histories. They are the stories of the generation who lived through it. As this generation is getting old, there is a need to document their experiences and record their memories,” says Mallika Ahluwalia, the museum’s co-founder and CEO.

The museum also has archival footage of the trains, kafilas, and camps during the Partition. The oldest AV material in the museum is footage from the freedom struggle from around 1920, covering the Non-Cooperation movement and the Khilafat movement.

To the museum, audiovisual technology not just offers solutions to document history, but also an opportunity to have a deeper engagement with the visitors. For example, the recording of Rabindranath Tagore’s ‘Amar Shonar Bangla’, which was written in the aftermath of the 1905 Partition of Bengal, plays in the museum’s ‘Resistance’ gallery.

Indira Gandhi Rashtriya Manav Sangrahalaya, Bhopal

In order to upskill its employees, Indira Gandhi Rashtriya Manav Sangrahalaya (IGRMS) in Bhopal recently organised an eight-day audio-visual workshop ‘Towards an Audio-Visual Museum.’ The principle role of digital documentation and maintaining digital archives, among other things, were discussed. Such workshops are important for the museum, which has about 10,000 hours of AV archives.

“Research and education being a mandate for IGRMS, we need to share authentic information about various tribal and folk communities. Our audio-visual collections are mostly ethnographic and are recorded or captured directly from the field as well as from in-house activities,” says Dilip Singh, joint director, IGRMS.

Indian Music Experience, Bengaluru

Indian Music Experience (IME) in Bengaluru is an interactive museum and uses AV material innovatively. For instance, the section on kaavads, a wooden portable shrine used by storytellers, is accompanied by a documentary on the subject by Neena Sabnani.

Manasi Prasad, Carnatic singer and director of Indian Music Experience | Photo Credit: K Bhagya Prakash

In another gallery, an auto-rickshaw has been turned into a mini-theatre, with films on indie bands playing inside. Samay Chakra is an immersive piece, wherein the overhead screen displays the time of the day, and the Hindustani raga alluding to that hour is played. The lyrics of a bandish composed in that raga also appears in one of the screens.

Manasi Prasad, director of IME, raises concerns regarding copyright issues and aggrandisement of technology. “One issue that the entire world of audiovisual archives is facing right now is getting permissions. The rights of a recording lie with all the people involved. So it becomes difficult to ascertain who it belongs to. In terms of technology, it requires institutions to have a robust digital infrastructure to withstand changes.”

Prasad also points out the need for sufficient funds to maintain proper infrastructure and hire competent staff. “Sometimes people don’t consider audiovisual material as valuable as an artefact. They feel it is just a recording. Just because it is intangible doesn’t mean it is not valuable,” she adds.

Challenges Destructions of the National Museum of Natural History in Delhi and the National Museum of Brazil in a fire have served as important lessons to museum administrators like Mallika. The latter had also lost some rare recordings among its precious assets. “The bulk of our collection is video and to make sure it is safe, we need to keep it in different formats and different places,” explains Mallika.

According to Vinod Daniel, Chair of AusHeritage and Board Member of the International Council of Museums, weather conditions are also detrimental to the safety of the audio-visual material.

Annamalai feels that technology is a double-edged sword. “The technology that is allowing us to make this content available can also be used to fake it. First of all, we should digitise retaining the originality and always keep the original. After we created this pen-drive, a lot of people call or mail us to authenticate.”

National Cultural Audiovisual Archives

It is indeed a heritage that is being preserved by organisations like National Cultural Audiovisual Archives (NCAA), Indira Gandhi National Centre for the Arts. In its pilot phase that ends this year, NCAA has partnered with 30 institutions across India and built over 31,000 hours of audio and video content.

In the next five years, NCAA has set a target of over 3.5 lakh hours of digitisation and an expanded network of partnering institutions.

On its audiovisual documentation work, Irfan Zuberi, project manager of NCAA, says, “They are valuable tools for piecing together several endangered or perhaps even extinct aspects of our shared heritage. For instance, recordings of legendary musicians continue to inspire current performers. That is how archival content can be relevant and become an integral part of current practice.” The oldest recording in its repository is a silent colour film from the collection of National Archives of India, depicting the immersion of the ashes of Mahatma Gandhi in 1948.

Irfan feels that in today’s scenario, the work of NCAA assumes more relevance. “Given technological obsolescence, there is a tight time window globally for playback of old formats of audio and video recordings, after which it would become nearly impossible to either find new playback machines or spare parts to repair existing playback machines. Thus, it is extremely important for analog audiovisual content to be migrated to digital file formats within the next 10 years.”

According to Irfan, the long-term preservation of digital content throws up challenges too. “The digital data has to be constantly checked for integrity, accuracy, and completeness at regular intervals and this is one of the key technical tasks performed by the NCAA, which has emerged as the world’s first Trustworthy Digital Repository.”
