Red warning in parts of Tamil Nadu, heavy rains may lash Chennai

A red warning for extremely heavy rainfall has been issued to parts of Tamil Nadu even as the northeast monsoon descended over the state last week. On Monday, the Regional Meteorological Centre in Chennai issued a red warning for Tuesday. “Extremely heavy rain (more than 20 cms) is likely to occur at isolated places over Tamil Nadu (the hilly areas of Nilgiris, Coimbatore, Theni and Dindigul districts).” it said. Heavy to very heavy rain is also likely to occur at isolated places over Dharmapuri, Krishnagiri, Salem, Vellore and Thiruvannamalai districts of Tamil Nadu.

Speaking to media persons in Chennai on Friday, S Balachandran, Director, Area Cyclone Warning Centre, Chennai, said, “As far as the next two days are concerned in Tamil Nadu and Puducherry, most areas will receive rainfall. Southern districts like Kanyakumari, Tirunelveli, Thoothukudi, Ramanathapuram, northern districts like Tiruvallur, Nilgiris and Coimbatore will experience extremely heavy rainfall in some parts. Delta districts, Cuddalore, Villupuram, Tiruvannamalai, Vellore, Salem, Madurai, Theni, Dindigul, Erode and Tiruppur will experience heavy rainfall in some areas.”

Fishermen have been advised not to venture into south-west Bay of Bengal or the sea by Kanyakumari on Monday and Tuesday.

“The sky condition is likely to be generally cloudy. Light to moderate rain/thunder showers likely to continue, heavy at times. Maximum and Minimum temperatures are likely to be around 29 and 24 deg Celsius respectively,” the IMD bulletin stated.

Thunderstorm with lightning is likely to occur at isolated places over the state between Monday and Wednesday.

According to the Commissionarate of Revenue Administration and Disaster Management, Kanyakumari district recorded the highest rainfall at 768 mm as on Monday, followed by Coimbatore (601.40 mm) and Nilgiris (665.60 mm).

City-based weather blogger Pradeep John, who runs the popular Facebook page Tamil Nadu Weatherman has also predicted heavy rains for coastal areas including Chennai on Monday and Tuesday.
