'TSRTC left with only Rs 7 crore in its coffers'

HYDERABAD: Stating that Rs 239 crore was being paid to TSRTC employees as salaries every month, the corporation’s in-charge managing director, Sunil Sharma, on Monday informed the Telangana high court that they are unable to pay salaries for September as they are left with just Rs 7 crore in the corporation’s coffers.Sharma, who is also the principal secretary of the state transport department, filed an affidavit to this effect before the court. He contended that RTC could not realise Rs 125 crore revenue that was expected during this festival season on account of the sudden strike of the workers. Justice Abhinand Kumar Shavili was hearing a plea filed by K Hanumanthu of Telangana Jatiya Mazdoor Union, one of the unions functioning in TSRTC, seeking immediate release of salaries to the striking workers. What we are seeking is the salary for the month we have worked, Mazdoor union counsel Chikkudu Prabhakar said.Sunil Sharma in his affidavit said that RTC has accumulated losses to an extent of Rs 5,269 crore over several years. Our annual revenue is Rs 4,882 crore where as the expenditure is Rs 5,811 crore, he said. Appearing on behalf of RTC, additional advocate general J Ramachandra Rao said that RTC earns on an average Rs 10 crore per day as revenue through tickets. During festival time, the daily earnings would go up to Rs 13 crore per day, he added. We lost all that income due to the strike, he said. Prabhakar however questioned as to how the corporation incurred so much loss when the state and RTC are claiming that they were running all the busses with temporary staff and hired busses.The in-charge MD in his affidavit explained that after the bifurcation of the state and the emergence of TSRTC as a separate entity, the corporation has raised the salaries of the workers to an extent of 67 per cent. Salaries alone consume 58 per cent of our revenue, he added. In June 2015, when wage revision was implemented, we gave as much as 44 per cent of fitment benefit to workers which alone is costing us Rs 900 crore every year, he said. In addition to this, the 16 per cent interim relief given last year which added an additional Rs 200 crore annual impact on us, he said. Due to all these reasons, the salary bill per month has gone up to Rs 239.68 crore, he said. Where as we have only Rs 7.49 crore in our RTC account as of now, Sharma said. The judge sought a reply from the union on all these contentions and posted the case to Oct 29.
