Bank strike today: Country-wide bank strike may disrupt banking operations

Bank Strike Today; Representational Image | Photo Credit: BCCL

Key Highlights The bank strike call has been collectively given by the All India Bank Employees Association (AIBEA) and Bank Employees Federation of India (BEFI) The membership of our bank employees in unions participating in strike is very few, SBI said in a statement The banking operations are largely hit In several parts of Maharashtra and Haryana due to the chief ministerial elections

New Delhi: The bank unions have called for a country-wide bank strike on Tuesday, October 22, 2019, in order to protest against the proposed mega bank merger plans of the government announced in August this year. Bank employees’ unions, earlier in September, threatened for a two-day bank strike in the last week of September, however, the strike was called off after a consortium of bank unions met government discussing their concerns. Other than the merger proposal of banks, the bank unions are now protesting against the fall in the deposit rates.

It can be noted that the Reserve Bank of India (RBI) has reduced the repo rate five times in the present calendar year following which the effective repo rate has come down to 5.15 per cent from 6.75 per cent before February 2019. In order to match the sharp cut in the repo rate by the central bank, all the scheduled commercial banks, NBFCs and other lending institutions have revised borrowing, as well as lending rates accordingly.

The bank strike call has been collectively given by the All India Bank Employees Association (AIBEA) and Bank Employees Federation of India (BEFI). Notably, a considerable section of PSU bank employees and all private sector banks are not participating in the bank strike on October 22, 2019. “The bank is taking necessary steps for the smooth functioning of branches on the proposed strike day. However, in the event the strike materialises, the functioning of the branches/offices may be impacted,” Syndicate Bank said in a communication.

“The membership of our bank employees in unions participating in strike is very few, so the impact of strike on Banks operation will be minimal,” the country’s largest bank by customers State Bank of India (SBI) informed through a regulatory filing.

"Members of AIBEA and BEFI (Bank Employees Federation of India) will be on strike on Tuesday across the country. Other unions in the industry are extending their support for the strike," news agency IANS reported citing AIBEA General Secretary C.H.Venkatachalam. ”IBA appealed to us not to go ahead with the strike but could not come out to resolve any of the demands raised by us,” the two unions said in a joint circular.

The private banks are not affected by the bank strike call. The banking operations are largely hit In several parts of Maharashtra and Haryana due to the chief ministerial elections. Both Haryana and Maharashtra went to poll on October 21 and the results will be announced on October 24, 2019.
