Hookah lounges base of love jihad, won’t allow in Bhopal, says ex-BJP MLA days after daughter claims torture

Former BJP MLA Surendra Nath Singh has issued a stern warning to hookah lounge owners in Bhopal and asked them to shut operations as soon as possible.

Speaking to India Today TV, Singh said, "Hookah lounges in Bhopal are the base of love jihad in Bhopal. Those who go to hookah lounges will be responsible for their own safety."

Singh added that young boys and girls are becoming addicts by going to hookah lounges. "I am appealing to those who are running hookah lounges to shut them. In these hookah lounges, girls and boys are becoming addicts," Singh said.

"Why do these children go to the hookah lounge? Why hookah? Whoever goes to these lounges must stop now because, after tomorrow, I will not tolerate hookah lounges anywhere in Bhopal. I don't talk about the world but hookah lounges won't run in Bhopal," he added.

Surendra Nath Singh accused a Congress MLA from Bhopal for "spreading love jihad" and added that his daughter, too, has become a victim of love jihad.

His comment comes days after his daughter released a video claiming that her family was torturing her and forcing her to get married to the legislator's son.

In the video, the daughter also claimed that her family was intentionally spreading lies that she is mentally unstable even though she is completely fine and left home at her own will.

However, Singh refuted the claims made by her daughter and added that his daughter was undergoing treatment for depression for five years. At the same time, the former MLA has lodged the missing report of his daughter at Kamla Nagar Police Station in Bhopal.

"She is under mental stress. Is it right to talk to her in such a situation? Those who are involved in this should be ready to face the consequences," he said.

Singh then said that every man wants to get his child married in his religion and society, adding that he would do the same.

"I will also marry my girl to those who believe in our tradition, those who believe in our god. I will not let love jihad happen in Bhopal. If love jihad happens, then we will fight a crusade now," he said.
