Will give befitting reply to those who cast an evil eye on India: Rajnath Singh issues fresh warning to Pak

Rajnath Singh warns Pakistan, again | Photo Credit: ANI

New Delhi: India once again on Tuesday issued a warning to Pakistan, asking it not to cast its “evil eye” on the country. Defence Minister Rajnath Singh said the Indian armed forces were fully capable to give a befitting reply to the enemy.

“India has never been offensive. India has never attacked any country in the world. India has never even acquired even an inch of land by force,” Rajnath Singh said. “…But our armed forces have the capability to give a befitting reply to those who try to cast their evil eye on India,” he added.

The minister was addressing the Naval Commanders conference here. He said the Navy has strengthened vigilance and made sure that a 26/11-type attack is not repeated.

“The sea route is secure under the Indian Navy’s watch. The Navy has resolved and has taken steps to ensure that under no circumstances should a 26/11 be repeated,” the minister said.

#Breaking | Defence Minister @RajnathSingh warns Pakistan.



‘Mend your ways or Indian Army will give a befitting response’, says Defence Minister Rajnath Singh. Listen in. | #OneIndiaSpooksPak pic.twitter.com/jrMEltXjgU — TIMES NOW (@TimesNow) October 22, 2019

The minister’s remarks came in the wake of Pakistan Army's unprovoked firing along the Line of Control in Jammu and Kashmir. Retaliating to the shelling along the LoC, the Indian Army on Sunday launched heavy artillery fire on four terror camps and several Pakistani military positions located in the Pakistan-occupied Kashmir, along the LoC. The Indian Army firing targeted the terror camps opposite to the Tangadhar sector in Jammu and Kashmir.

On Monday too, Singh had warned Pakistan and said the Army would respond to Pakistani attempts to infiltrate terrorists into India. The minister was speaking in Leh, during a function to open the 1,400-foot-long Col Chewang Rinchen bridge over the Shyok river in eastern Ladakh.

"However, our neighbour Pakistan... Our armed forces have never been on the offensive on the Pakistani side. We have never done the first firing. But attempts have been made from the other side to destabilise, weaken and compromise the integrity of India," he said. The Indian armed forces gave a "befitting reply" to them, he added.

"If they (Pakistan) do not stop infiltration, our armed forces will keep giving befitting replies until they stop such activities," Singh said.

On Sunday, Army Chief Gen Bipin Rawat had said that between six to 10 Pakistan Army personnel were killed and three terror camps destroyed as the Indian Army launcher retaliatory fire across the LoC opposite the Tangdhar and Keran sectors.
