Breaking News: Police Custody Of Former PMC Bank Director Extended Till October 24

New Delhi:

Supreme Court to hear disqualified Karnataka MLAs who are seeking to contest by-polls for 15 Assembly seats in the state. Lawmakers have approached the apex court, challenging Kumar's decision to disqualify them. Some of them have contended in their pleas that the decision taken by Kumar before resigning as the speaker was an entirely illegal, arbitrary and mala fide. They have also questioned Kumar's decision to reject their resignations by holding that those were not voluntary and genuine.

All India Bank Employees Association (AIBEA) and Bank Employees Federation Of India (BEFI) have called for a strike across the country to stage a protest against the mergers of 10 public sector banks (PSBs).

Here are all the LIVE updates:

15:36 (IST) Facebook Twitter Whats app Linked In Punjab: Heads of foreign missions in Delhi, at Golden Temple in Amritsar, to take part in celebrations related to the 550th birth anniversary of Guru Nanak Dev ji.

15:36 (IST) Facebook Twitter Whats app Linked In Sources: Signing of agreement on Kartarpur Corridor between India and Pakistan unlikely tomorrow. Earlier, both the countries had announced, the Agreement on Kartarpur Corridor will be signed on 23rd October.

15:36 (IST) Facebook Twitter Whats app Linked In Punjab and Maharashtra Co-operative (PMC) Bank case: Special Court in Mumbai extends Enforcement Directorate custody of accused Rakesh Wadhawan and Sarang Wadhawan till October 24.

14:09 (IST) Facebook Twitter Whats app Linked In India Proud Of Your Accomplishments, Tweets PM After Meeting Nobel Laureate Abhijit Banerjee Prime Minister Narendra Modi met Nobel Laureate Abhijit Banerjee in New Delhi on Tuesday. After the meeting, the Prime Minister took to Twitter and posted the photo of the meeting. “Excellent meeting with Nobel Laureate Abhijit Banerjee. His passion towards human empowerment is clearly visible. We had a healthy and extensive interaction on various subjects. India is proud of his accomplishments. Read more...

12:05 (IST) Facebook Twitter Whats app Linked In Maharashtra: Punjab and Maharashtra Co-operative (PMC) Bank depositors stage a protest at Azad Maidan in Mumbai

12:04 (IST) Facebook Twitter Whats app Linked In Delhi: Major pollutants PM 2.5 at 178 and PM 10 at 121 in 'Unhealthy' category, in area around Major Dhyan Chand National Stadium and India Gate, according to the Air Quality Index (AQI) data.

12:04 (IST) Facebook Twitter Whats app Linked In Union Minister Hardeep Singh Puri accompanies heads of foreign missions in Delhi to a visit to the Golden Temple in Amritsar, to take part in celebrations related to the 550th birth anniversary of Guru Nanak Dev ji.

12:03 (IST) Facebook Twitter Whats app Linked In Vizianagaram: Fire broke out in a building today at Three Lamps Junction, due to an electric short circuit; no injuries or casualties reported.

12:03 (IST) Facebook Twitter Whats app Linked In Supreme Court says, P Chidambaram can be released provided he is not arrested in any other case and on the personal bond of Rs 1 lakh. He has to make himself available for interrogation.

12:03 (IST) Facebook Twitter Whats app Linked In Defence Minister: India has never been offensive, India has never attacked any country of the world, India has never even acquired even an inch of land by force, but our Armed Forces have the capability to give befitting reply to those who try to cast their evil eye on India.

12:03 (IST) Facebook Twitter Whats app Linked In Kailash Vijayvargiya, BJP: Mamata Banerjee is CM of West Bengal & not the PM. It's a Central govt's decision whether to implement NRC or not, why is she so worried?If Centre decides to implement NRC, she won't be able to do anything about it as it will be central govt's decision.

12:02 (IST) Facebook Twitter Whats app Linked In Brajesh Pathak, Law Minister of Uttar Pradesh: We stand in support with Kamlesh Tiwari's family and the culprits will be caught soon. We will take the case to a fast-track court. And we will demand death sentence for the killers.

12:02 (IST) Facebook Twitter Whats app Linked In Karnataka disqualified MLAs matter: Supreme Court defers for tomorrow the hearing on the petition filed by disqualified Karnataka MLAs seeking a direction related to by-polls on assembly seats.

12:02 (IST) Facebook Twitter Whats app Linked In Bengaluru: Bharat Earth Movers Limited (BEML) Employees Association stage a protest to oppose Central government's decision to privatise BEML.

12:02 (IST) Facebook Twitter Whats app Linked In Punjab & Maharashtra Co-operative (PMC) Bank case: Police custody of former director of PMC Bank, S. Surjit Singh Arora, has been extended till 24th October by Mumbai's Esplanade Court.

For all the Latest India News, Download News Nation Android and iOS Mobile Apps.
