‘Gods of Dharmapuri’ web series presents actor Satya Dev in a new zone

Satya Dev Kancharana is emerging as an actor of repute in Telugu cinema

Like many movie buffs, actor Satya Dev Kancharana grew up watching gangster dramas. When he finally had the chance to act in one, he was more than game. Gods of Dharmapuri (G.O.D), which will stream on Zee 5 from October 23, stars Satya in the lead. Set in the fictitious town of Dharmapuri, located between Rayalaseema and Karnataka, the gangster drama directed by Anish Kuruvilla unfolds in the 1960s and 70s, and has been shot in Hampi, Anegundi and Bellary in Karnataka.

As the team got together in Hyderabad to unveil glimpses to the media on Monday, Satya himself was away in Araku for a new film. However, he manages a telephonic interview when the mobile network service is favourable. “I would have had to cancel my shoot for two days to attend the event; I didn’t want the unit to suffer and decided to stay back,” he says.

Satya is among the exciting actors to watch out for in Telugu cinema. He has emerged as a dependable actor, capable of stealing the thunder with his understated and measured performance. Case in point is Brochevarevarura. He has been approached to reprise his part for the Tamil remake of the film: “I am not sure if I can match my dates to their schedule, so it’s still in consideration. A couple of Tamil filmmakers approached me after watching Broche…” says Satya.

Satya Dev

He is a part of the thriller Raagala 24 Gantalu starring Eesha Rebba, and has an extended cameo in George Reddy, and a few other projects. G.O.D has been an unexpected addition to his oeuvre.

The 10-episode series spans nearly 17 years and is 6.5 hours long. “A lot of planning went into shooting this enormous story in under 70 days, and I’d call this Anish’s vision of a gangster drama,” says Satya, who plays the character of Venu Reddy.

Venu, reveals Satya, returns to Dharmapuri after studying in Delhi and finds himself dragged into the happenings in the gangster family. “The mother wants the son to stay away from all this and lead a dignified life. But fate has its way of bringing him back to that zone,” says the actor.

Satya and Karthik Rathnam play brothers and the cast includes Kannada actor Raj Deepak Shetty, Malayalam actors Shruti Jayan and John Kottoly, and Chandini Chowdary. “It was a competitive atmosphere on the sets. When one performs well, the others are automatically motivated to give their best. It was great to work with some fine talent,” he says.

In the pre-production stage, the actors had a workshop to discuss key scenes and to be in sync with each other.

Hybrid dialect

Reflecting on filming in UNESCO heritage zones in Karnataka, Satya says, “You won’t find two-storied buildings and [unplanned] urbanisation; the region can pass off as the 1970s and suited our story.”

In the series, Satya speaks “a hybrid dialect of Rayalaseema Telugu and Kannada, which hasn’t been explored in Telugu cinema or web series. In fact, we haven’t had many original Telugu gangster drama films, and definitely not an origin story of a gangster, his family and power equations.”

Anish, Satya and the principal crew toyed with a few looks for him. Satya initially was to sport a beard and long hair, until Anish preferred a clean shaven look.

Satya has been part of Telugu films since 2011. A software engineer, he would shoot during the day and do the evening and night shifts in office, barely sleeping a couple of hours each day. Cinema was what he always wanted to do. The IT job ensured steady income. “You don’t get paid much until you establish yourself in cinema. Two and a half years ago, I quit my job with the confidence that I can sustain with what I earn as an actor,” he laughs.

Jyothilakshmi got him noticed, and it was followed by Kshanam, The Ghazi Attack, Antariksham 9000 kmph, Bluffmaster, and Brochevarevarura among many other films. “If I listen to 120 stories, I’d love 10 of them, seven would go on floors, four would get completed, three films will have the first copy ready, and one will release in theatres. This is how it has been for me,” he laughs.

Satya confesses to being picky about what he wants to do. “The story, not the money, excites me. I do my best with what’s offered to me,” he says, signing off.

(Gods of Dharmapuri will stream on Zee 5 in Telugu and Hindi from October 23)
