Karnataka witnesses excess rainfall in 27 of 30 districts

Karnataka witnesses excess rainfall in 27 of 30 districts

In the last 24 hours, 27 districts, 142 taluks and 549 hoblis received excess rainfall, as per data compiled by the KSNDMC.

news Weather

In the last 24 hours, 27 districts, 142 taluks and 549 hoblis received excess rainfall, as per data compiled by the Karnataka State Natural Disaster Monitoring Centre (KSNDMC).

At least two deaths were reported due to the excess rainfall in Koppal district.

“The southern peninsular India is receiving rainfall due to active low pressure systems in both the Arabian Sea and the Bay of Bengal. In Karnataka, a red warning was issued to the coastal districts and an orange warning was issued to many interior Karnataka districts,” Sunil Gavaskar, a meteorologist at KSNDMC, told TNM.

Region-wise, coastal Karnataka received 26.5 mm of rainfall, which is 453% more than the normal rainfall. Similar trends were observed for Malnad which got 19.5 mm of rainfall, which is 364% excess rainfall. North interior Karnataka and south interior Karnataka received 319% and 502% excess rainfall respectively. Hadagali taluk in Ballari received the highest amount of rainfall of 88.6 mm. In northern Karnataka, several major roads were cut off due to waterlogging.

The Indian Meteorological Department said Ajjampura in Chikkamagaluru received the highest rainfall of 170 mm in the last 24 hours. Other places with high rainfall included Yedwad (Belagavi district) 160 mm; Ramadurga (Belagavi district) 150 mm; Mahalingapura, Rabkavi (both Bagalkote district), Lakkavalli, Yegati (both Chikkamagaluru district) 130 mm each; Lokapur (Bagalkote district), Shivani (Chikkamagaluru district) 120 mm each.

IMD had already issued a red warning for the three coastal districts of the state – Udupi, Dakshina Kannada and Uttara Kannada – starting from Wednesday. The red warning indicates that the three coastal districts will receive widespread rainfall, with places receiving heavy to very heavy rainfall and some isolated places receiving extremely heavy rainfall.

An orange warning was issued to districts in north and south interior Karnataka. Districts like Belagavi, Dharwad, Haveri and Koppal, which were battered by the rains in August, are expected to receive heavy to very heavy rainfall again till October 24, after which the forecast suggests a yellow warning for the districts which indicates heavy rainfall.
