Case against Bishop for misbehaving with woman

PK Samuel

Bishop of Church of South India

Karnataka

Bengaluru

Arun

Murugan

Bangalore

The city police questioned, the, Central, on Saturday after he was booked for criminal intimidation and outraging the modesty of woman after he allegedly misbehaved with a 27-year-old woman at his MG Road residence.The bishop had reportedly summoned the woman to convince her to change her statement in a six-year-old harassment case filed by her against his aide Vinod Dasan. The complainant reportedly told the police that the Bishop offered her Rs 1 crore — plus a job— if she accepted his demand and when she refused it, the Bishop allegedly misbehaved with her. The incident reportedly happened on January 21 and when the complainant tried to raise an alarm, the Bishop had allegedly threatened her with dire consequences. A week later, the woman had tried to commit suicide and was admitted to a Shivajinagar hospital. The case will be transferred to Central Crime Branch."We filed the case immediately after recording her statement on January 31. Initially, Shivajinagar police could not record the statement on January 30 as she was undergoing treatment The case has been filed against the Bishop under sections 354, 504 and 506 read with section 34. Vinod Dasan has been named as the second accused,”said Rahul Kumar, Deputy Commissioner ,(East).The woman had filed a complaint with the city police in 2013, accusing Vinod Dasan of harassing and blackmailing her. The case is under trial and the Bishop allegedly intervened in the case because he was reportedly close to Dasan who is also a pastor.Two youths on a bike who teased girls travelling on a BMTC bus were arrested after a passenger took a video of the act and had it posted on Bengaluru police’s Twitter handle. The arrested have been identified asKumar, 20, and Velu Murugan, 19. According to the police, Kumar was riding the bike, whilewas riding pillion. The incident happened at Indiranagar. According to the police, when the duo spotted the girls seated on the bus, they started whistling and passing comments, while riding along the bus. Annoyed by their act, one of the passengers in the bus took a video and posted it on the Twitter page ofCity Police. The Halasuru Traffic Police later tracked down the duo and arrested them.Two notorious rowdy sheeters were arrested while trying to sell firearms in Nagarbhavi. The two have been identified as Tommy alias Jagdeesh (37), and Keerthi (26). An unlicensed gun and four bullets were seized from the accused.According to the police, Tommy has been involved in gang wars and multiple robberies. Various other cases have been registered against him. The police said his family members too are involved in many crimes.
