'Don't turn into hounds': Kerala Minister condemns media for sensational reports

'Don't turn into hounds': Kerala Minister condemns media for sensational reports

Finance Minister Thomas Isaac was criticising the media for sensationalising the case of a mother and son's death in Delhi.

news Controversy

Two days after the mysterious deaths of a Malayali mother-son duo in New Delhi, Kerala's finance minister TM Thomas came down strongly on the vernacular media for their 'one-sided coverage' of the case.

"What is happening to our media?" the minister asked in a Facebook post where he also cautioned journalists to remain 'watch dogs of the society and not turn into hounds'. Adding that the basic lesson of journalism is to fact check information multiple times and then arrive at a final inference before publishing reports, Thomas Isaac berated the media for writing sensationalised stories without checking for facts.

Thomas Isaac also gave examples to substantiate his allegations of regional media sensationalising news. Referring to the row over Minister for Local Administration KT Jaleel interfering in the case of student Viji to help her get a college transfer, Thomas Isaac said that Viji was a poor student who was orphaned at a young age. He also added that the minister had extended his help out of humanitarian concern and that the media should have checked these facts before publishing news on 'unwarranted aid' offered to a girl.

Thomas Isaac also referred to the controversy around Kollam native and student S Sreehari who Minister KT Jaleel assisted in passing his B Tech exam at the KTM college in Kollam. According to media reports, Sreehari, who hailed from a poor family, had failed his college exam and KT Jaleel had personally intervened to help him clear the test.

"Sreehari's father is a part-time sweeper on the Devaswom board. His mother is a housewife. Should the media not have enquired what kind of influence such a person can exercise on a minister? That investigation is what journalists are supposed to do. Instead, are you supposed to be stretching gossip and speculations into 8 columns and spreading the news?" Thomas Isaac asked.

The minister made these references to justify his argument that in the alleged suicide case of the mother and son in Delhi, the Malayalam media had played a role in sensationalising reports on them.

On Saturday, the Delhi police recovered the body of the 55-year-old woman, identified as Kottayam native Lissy, who was found dead in her apartment in New Delhi's Pitampura area.

Later on, the police also recovered the body of her son Alan Stanley, an ad-hoc professor in Delhi University's (DU) St Stephen's College, from the railway tracks at Sarai Rohilla in Delhi. A suicide note was found near his body, police said.

The mother-son duo who hail from Kottayam have a case of abetment to suicide registered agaisnt them in Idukki, Kerala. They had allegedly been depressed about the case in Kerala. The case was filed by the son of Lissy's second husband, John Wilson from his first marriage. John allegedly killed himself due to depression, and his son claims that Lissy allegedly transferred his funds to her account.

Even as the probe continues, friends of Alan have alleged that he and his mother took their lives thanks to vicious news reports circulated in Malayalam. They added that a Malayalam newspaper report published on October 15 compared 55-year-old Lissy to the alleged serial killer Jolly Joseph from Kottayam. Lissy's first husband too had passed away after which Alan had encouraged her to marry a second time.

The Crime Branch is probing the abetment to suicide case which was registered in Idukki. Meanwhile, the Delhi police are also probing the double deaths to ascertain whether it was a case of murder or suicide.

In his post, Thomas Isaac also added that despite severe differences of opinion, it was important to have an interactive relationship with the media. He added that he too had a past where he was relentlessly hounded by reporters. "Our Chief Minister Pinarayi Vijayan too has overcome/outlived that hounding and has moved forward," he added.

He also observed that certain reporters were overenthusiastic about fluffing stories and publishing them to appease their sources, instead of repeatedly fact checking.

"It is enough to just use your common sense to understand that it is not legal to hype up one side of the story while reporting based on petitions in the family court," he said.

He added that in order to have saved Stanley and his mother's lives, "it was enough to follow the basic protocols. Losing that caution will disrupt our democratic system. Journalism is to ensure justice, not to obstruct/harm justice."
