Maharashtra, Haryana election results today: BJP looks to bloom again, Congress hopes for revival

Results for elections to the Maharashtra and Haryana assemblies will be out today. Both Maharashtra and Haryana are ruled by the Bharatiya Janata Party, which came to power in the states in 2014. The Maharashtra assembly election and the Haryana assembly election are the first state elections to take place in the country since the 2019 Lok Sabha polls that saw PM Narendra Modi win a second term in office after a handsome BJP victory.

Along with the Maharashtra election result and the Haryana election result, outcomes will also be known for more than 50 bypolls that were conducted simultaneously with the state polls. The bypolls include elections to 51 assembly seats and two Lok Sabha constituencies across 18 states.

The two state elections of Maharashtra and Haryana are being seen as a test of the BJP's popularity. The results of the Maharashtra and Haryana polls will offer an indication of whether the party still enjoys the massive popularity it did when it won the Lok Sabha elections.

The election results are also important for the Congress, which is fighting a battle of survival. The Congress party plunged into a leadership crisis following its humiliating defeat in the Lok Sabha polls. The Maharashtra and Haryana election results could offer a sign of how the Congress's internal crisis could impact its political existence.

Follow live updates of Maharashtra, Haryana and bybolls results 2019 here

CAN BJP GO PAST HISTORY?

If the Bharatiya Janata Party wins the Maharashtra and Haryana assembly elections, it would be the first time the party will have won a second term in either of the states. The two states have seen long years of Congress rule. The BJP has been in power in these states before, but it has never won re-election bids in either Maharashtra or Haryana.

Also read | Stage set for counting as Maharashtra Assembly Election results to be out on Thursday

What is also interesting about these states is that the BJP was never in a dominant position up until the 2014 elections -- the party was never in power in Haryana before 2014 while in Maharashtra it was a part of a Shiv Sena-led government once. The Devendra Fadnavis government in Maharashtra and the ML Khattar government in Haryana, which were formed after the 2014 elections, were the first BJP-led administrations in either state.

The other interesting factor (though not directly linked to either state) is that the BJP's electoral fortunes have not been so great in recent state elections where it has had strong chief minister faces/candidates. It either lost (Delhi in 2015, Bihar in 2015, Chhattisgarh in 2018, Madhya Pradesh in 2018, Rajasthan in 2018) or barely scraped through (Gujarat in 2017) in such elections.

FOLLOW LIVE UPDATES OF MAHARASHTRA ASSEMBLY ELECTION RESULT 2019

FOLLOW LIVE UPDATES OF HARYANA ASSEMBLY ELECTION RESULT 2019

TEST FOR CONGRESS

Much like at the national level, the Congress is in disarray in Maharashtra and Haryana. Infighting, defections and sulking leaders have added to the party's worry. Political pundits have even questioned whether the party had its heart in fighting the Maharashtra and Haryana elections considering the many internal challenges it is faced with.

Regardless of the critics brushing them aside, the Congress will be intently watching the election results as they unfold Thursday. A win in either Maharashtra or Haryana or just a performance that gives the BJP a scare will work as a much-needed booster shot for the Congress.

Also watch: Khattar vs Hooda faceoff: Who will win the battle for Haryana?

WHO STANDS WHERE

The BJP is fighting the Maharashtra election in alliance with the Shiv Sena. The two parties joined the 2014 Maharashtra election separately but later joined hands to form the government. Similarly, the Congress and the Nationalist Congress Party too are fighting together this time, unlike in 2014 when they fought solo.

Meanwhile, Haryana will see a straight fight between the BJP and the Congress with regional parties such as Jannayak Janta Party and Indian National Lok Dal expected to play spoilsport. In case either of the national parties come up short, the regional parties could play a role in deciding who forms the next government.

For Dushyant Chautala's JPP, this Haryana election will also be a prestige battle against the INLD. The JPP was a result of a split within the INLD and the Chautala clan that controls the party. Dushyant Chautala will be looking to best INLD even if he knows the chances of him becoming chief minister are slim.

For any party or alliance to win the Maharashtra election, they would need a minimum of 145 seats. To win Haryana, a party will need at least 46 seats.

WHAT EXIT POLLS PREDICT

Exit polls have given the BJP-Shiv Sena alliance a clear victory in Maharashtra. While different exit polls differ on the number of seats the alliance will win, all agree on two points: The BJP-Shiv Sena alliance will cross the halfway mark on their own and the BJP will win more seats than its ally Shiv Sena.

In Haryana, however, things are interesting. While most exit polls predict a BJP victory, some forecast that the party might not be able to achieve its 'ab ki baar 75 dream' goal. The India Today-Axis My India exit polls predicted even a closer race -- the poll forecast a hung assembly in the state.

THE BYPOLLS

Along with the Maharashtra and Haryana election, results will also be out for 53 bypolls that were conducted simultaneously. These include bypolls to 51 assembly seats and two Lok Sabha constituencies.

The BJP and its allies held nearly 30 of these assembly seats, while the Congress had won 12 and the rest were with regional parties before bypolls were required on these seats. The bypolls are a battle of prestige for the parties as the results will not substantially change the seat arithmetic in the any of the legislatures and will be more of a morale booster.

Today, counting will be held for the 11 assembly bypolls in Uttar Pradesh, followed by six in Gujarat, five in Bihar, four in Assam and two each in Himachal Pradesh and Tamil Nadu. The other states where bypolls were held are Punjab (4 seats), Kerala (5 seats), Sikkim (3 seats), Rajasthan (2 seats) and one seat each in Arunachal Pradesh, Madhya Pradesh, Odisha, Chhattisgarh, Puducherry, Meghalaya and Telangana.

The two Lok Sabha seats where bypolls were included Satara (Maharashtra) and Samastipur (Bihar) Lok Sabha seats, which were held by the NCP and the LJP respectively.

Counting of votes for the Maharashtra assembly election, the Haryana assembly election and the various bypolls will begin at 8 am. Trends will come in through the day and we should have an indication of which way the political winds are blowing by noon. Stay with IndiaToday.in where we will bring you live updates, live commentary and the latest news on the election results.
