Fear psychosis pushing Rohingyas to the brink

Fear psychosis pushing Rohingyas to the brink

The city was once their safest refuge, its people the ‘friendliest’ and ‘helpful’

JAMMU, February 2: Panic and sense of fear is gripping the Rohingya refugees, who found a safe refuge in the city about a decade back. Housed in shabby clusters with poor sanitation in 22 different locations on land they have taken on rent, they are now caught in a situation where the threat of a second dislocation, after their displacement from Rakhine in Myanmar, is looming over their heads.

While many Rohingyas in Jammu offer several reasons, for the fresh anxieties, ranging from political propaganda against them to profiling their personal data through elaborate forms and bio-metrics, about 300 families have already packed their bags and left for Bangladesh or other cities in India. Their exact locations are unknown.

On January 18 this year, 31 Rohingyas from Jammu, while trying to flee towards Bangladesh, were arrested at the no-man’s land between India and Bangladesh by the BSF and handed over to Tripura police, according to reports in the national press.

They were not the only ones to have fled Jammu in panic. Aamir Hussain, chairman of Rohingya Refugee Committee, informed that Rohingyas have started fleeing during the last four months. Earlier last year, some of them shifted to Hyderabad and Calcutta but due to lack of jobs there some of them returned.

Out of 1350 registered families four months ago, only a thousand families are presently staying in Jammu, Hussain told, maintaining that the average size of one family is about 5-6 persons.

Two fire incidents in recent years also sparked insecurities. The first of them, two years ago razed to ground the Rohingya cluster in Narwal, in which 8 people are believed to have been killed, three of who were completely charred with just few remnants of their bones left for the body count. A subsequent fire incident in another Rohingya cluster in Bhagwati Nagar further deepened the ‘sabotage theory’. Mazhar (name changed), who works as daily wage casual labourer, adds another incident to the list. Living in Bhatindi cluster colony, he alleges that four months ago when during the night some of the Rohingyas saw mysterious people around their colony and when we came out to confront them, they left behind a gallon of oil. “The incident was reported to the police but there has never been an investigation,” he says.

Aamir Hussain is worried that such incidents are forcing the Rohingya community, which had finally begun to find its bearings in Jammu and begun recollecting their lives, to look for other safer pastures – other cities in the country or Bangladesh. “But it is impossible to go back to Rakhine and face the kind of oppression we were facing unless the government in Myanmar is willing to give us our due rights as equal citizens,” he says. Additionally, news of getting caught at the borders while returning to Bangladesh makes them hesitant to embark on another adventure.

The political campaigns against Rohingyas in Jammu started first in 2008 during the Amarnath agitation but the feeble noises were soon lost only to be revived post 2014 after BJP came into power at the Centre and as a coalition partner in Jammu and Kashmir. Several political groups, media organisations and even the Jammu Chamber of Commerce in the last three years have made open calls for ousting Rohingyas. Before that Panthers Party put up posters calling for their ouster and linking them to terrorism. Propaganda and rumours have further fanned the xenophobia at the local level by constantly branding them as “terrorists” “jehadis” and “security-threats”.

Though police officials maintain that no such case of their involvement in any terror activities in Jammu has come to their notice. “There are perhaps some petty cases of theft and drug abuse against a couple of them,” a top police officer said on conditions of anonymity.

SSP Jammu Tejinder Singh also ruled out the involvement in terrorism cases but expressed his inability to give off hand account of the number of Rohingyas involved in criminal cases or those facing arrests.

Aamir Hussain says that 15 odd Rohingyas serving their time in prison in various jails of Jammu. The number matches the statistic made public by the state government last year on the floor of the state legislative assembly. Most of those arrested, he says, are arrested for illegally crossing the borders. But, adds, “when they were arrested, they had already applied for the refugee status at the UNHCR but have not been released after they received their valid cards.”

Shafi Alam, an ulema who runs a madrassa in the Rohingya cluster colony in Narwal, laments that their families have spent all their earnings to fight the court cases. “In 8 of these cases,” he says, “within minutes of the release of these men, they were re-arrested in fresh cases.” He was not aware of the details of the fresh charges pressed against them.

Despite such statistics already available in the public domain, the massive demonization project of the right-wing organisations, some fringe groups and trade organisations has resulted in linkage of every small incident to the Rohingyas without an iota of evidence. Last year, two Rohingyas were arrested on allegations of cow slaughter. Before that, some saffron groups, while defending the rape and murder accused in the infamous Rasana case, began accusing Rohingyas for the incident, even though these refugees are settled in Jammu city, a good 50 kilometres away from the site of crime and there was not even a shred of evidence to substantiate such claims.

Fear psychosis is further deepened by the mandatory process of biometrics, preceded by filing in of long cumbersome forms. “Most Rohingyas are illiterate and fear that the personal details listed in the forms and the biometrics would be taken as a consent to forcibly deport them. They feel that once they give their biometrics, they will be ready for deportation,” says Aamir Hussain.

In October 2018, Union Home Minister Rajnath Singh while announcing the government’s decision to deport all Rohingyas said that states have been asked to identify Rohingya refugees and collect their biometric details. The Centre will send the biometric report collected by states to the Myanmar government through diplomatic channel, he had said. A month later, Jammu and Kashmir Governor Satya Pal Malik maintained that the biometrics of Rohingyas living in Jammu will be completed by January 2019 and sent to the Centre.

The biometrics data is being collected at the Jammu deputy commissioner’s office. When asked whether the process has been completed, the deputy commissioner said that the work is in progress and no such deadline has so far been given by the central government. Asked if they were facing problems because of reluctance on part of the refugees to be profiled, he said, “we have our ways and we are doing our job” but refused to comment on the purpose of the biometric profiling or the anxieties the process was causing among the refugees.

Shafi Alam explains, “one needs to understand that owing to our individual and collective experiences in Myanmar and thereafter, fear is deeply ingrained in our psyche. We faced the ruthless power of the state and took the treacherous route over the difficult mountains (some came via the sea) into India via Bangladesh. We set up temporary homes here, found time getting jobs and even before we could begin to settle down in our ramshackle shabby homes, we are grappling with the threat of being deported.”

“How can we go back? The situation there is life-threatening and there is enough media coverage to prove that,” Alam says, adding that the Rohingya community by and large is extremely thankful to the Indians for their show of humanity “barring some voices who want us out for their politics”. He sighs and continues, “by and large, people here are friendly, hospitable and helpful. If we had such an example of humanity and democracy in Burma, we’d never have left home.”

“Why is this biometrics being collected and all our personal data taken?” some of the Rohingyas question. “Already when we got our UN cards, similar data has already been collated,” they say, adding that they are extremely worried about their fate.

A major sense of threat also comes from the forcible decision to deport 7 Rohingyas from Assam in October last. They had been arrested in 2012 in Silchar, Assam for on charges of illegal entry. Prior to that in August 2018, the Indian government announced plans to deport “illegal foreign nationals,” including an estimated 40,000 Rohingya, 16,500 of whom are registered with the UN refugee agency (UNHCR). The government contended that all Rohingya could be subject to deportation, regardless of registration status or international protection standards.

The community members are following these developments. The larger worry for the Rohingyas now is that whether they have the valid UN registration or not, in the given scenario, they feel vulnerable to being deported or at least dislocated.
