Accident risk open manhole at Wanawadi plugged by PMC

The agency moved to address the issue on Vitthalrao Shivarkar Road following a Pune Mirror report on October 21



Commuters using Vitthalrao Shivarkar Road and area residents of Wanawadi are immensely relieved after Pune Municipal Corporation (PMC) closed an open manhole which was an accident risk.



This comes after Pune Mirror had earlier reported about the open manhole that had had been left like that near Parmar Plaza, posing a high risk of accident, on October 21.



Area residents had claimed that the PMC had turned a blind eye towards the issue and had demanded immediate repair to avoid untoward incidents. They had also put up tree branches and tyres around the open manhole to caution citizens and commuters about the hazard.



Taking cognisance of the Mirror report, Sanjay Gawade, assistant commissioner of Wanwadi-Ramtekdi ward office, took swift action. Gawade shared, “Most of my staff were busy in election work, due to which the problem was left unattended for some days. Orders were given to my department officials to visit the location and get the broken cover replaced immediately. It was replaced on the same day the issue was highlighted and we are happy that no major tragedy was reported. Due to the heavy vehicles movement on these roads, manhole covers get damaged and break.”



Area resident Vijay Pardeshi said, “The manhole had been lying open right in the middle of the bustling commercial and residential area for the past couple of days and it had made the commuting risky. Several area residents and schoolchildren use the road to commute on a daily basis. I am happy that the manhole is covered and there is no more risk of accidents. I thank the local body for acting swiftly and showing concern about citizens.”



Sajid Shaikh, a regular commuter, said, “The Vitthalrao Shivarkar Road is the prime road used by thousands of commuters daily to travel and it had turned into a hazard. Some of the area residents then put up branches to caution the public. Due to the rain, waterlogging and the risk of accident had increased and it had been worrying the area residents. But now, it has been solved.”


