Govt asks edu dept to cancel order for recovery of profs’ salaries

The govt has warned VNSGU from committing similar mistake in future

Surat: The state government has ordered office of commissioner of higher education on Wednesday to cancel its previous orders to recover salary from three senior professors of Gujarati Department of Veer Narmad South Gujarat University (VNSGU). It has also asked ordered the commissioner to consider to continue their services and give them all eligible benefits.

Sources said that the entire issue arose as VNSGU had earlier not taken a firm stand in supporting the senior professors.

“The issue harmed image of two-time Sahitya Akademi award winner Sharifa Vijliwala and other two teachers. It also damaged the university’s reputation as good quality teachers will now think twice before joining the institute,” said a senior VNSGU senator.

In the order education department has warned VNSGU administration not to commit such mistakes in the future and take necessary approval before taking financial decisions related to its employees.

In August, VNSGU has issued notices to associate professors Vijliwala and Jashu Patel; and Naresh Shukla, assistant professor; and ordered recovery of their salaries since their appointment in the university in 2013.

The professors were told that the procedure to protect their pay and other benefits from previous government jobs was incomplete. The professors joined VNSGU leaving government jobs in other institutes. Despite teaching experience of over 20 years, their jobs were not considered continuous in VNSGU due to negligence of university officials.

“Following appointment in 2013, VNSGU syndicate protected our pay considering our experience soon after our probation period ended in 2015. But it took two years for approval from government,” said one of the affected professors.

“In 2017, government raised query that under which rules we are getting the cumulative benefits. Since majority of the members in syndicate have changed by that time and the new body had serious political differences with the previous office bearers. They did not give clear reply due to which government ordered recovery of salary and stop our benefits,” the professor added.

Despite multiple attempts VNSGU vice chancellor Shivendra Gupta was not available for comments.


