Acid attack threat case: MSU panel fails to find evidence against accused students

Vadodara: In a new twist to the acid attack threat case that had rocked the M S University campus in April, a probe committee has found no evidence against the infamous Pathan group, which was accused of threatening girl students with acid attack.

Saloni Mishra, former vice-president (VP) of MSU Students Union (MSUSU), had alleged that she was threatened of acid attack by Zuber Pathan and seven other students - Fazal Pathan, Aakib Pathan, Atikul Pathan, Sajid Pathan, Mohsin Pathan, Rustam Pathan and Kalim Pathan.

Mishra had also filed a police complaint based on which the accused students were arrested. Zuber, who has been jailed under the Prevention of Anti-Social Act (PASA), and cops even made him sit like a rooster and video-graphed him accepting his notorious behaviour.

“In view of the unavailability of the audio or video recording evidence which support the aforesaid misconduct and after making all efforts by the committee and also non-submission from the so-called victim and as per the recorded statement of all the four security personnel who were the site witness of the incident, it is very difficult to prove that the threatening words about the acid attack have been communicated,” the report of the committee which was tabled before university’s syndicate members on Tuesday states.

The report states that the panel had gone through the CCTV footage of the university head office and recorded statement of all the security personnel who were present at that time. It also states that the committee had asked Mishra to produce audio or video recording evidence before it within two days.

Based on committee’s recommendation, university has decided to put seven accused students on probation. After Mishra’s complaint, the university had debarred all the eight students from taking admission or re-admission in academic year 2019-20 while it had also decided to withhold the results of all the students.

Later, except Zuber, seven other accused students had filed a special civil application in Gujarat High Court (HC) against the university’s decision of withholding their results.

On July 25, HC had issued oral order asking MSU to decide over the representation of the petitioners expeditiously .



Facebook Twitter Linkedin EMail
