Haryana Election Results 2019 Highlights: BJP to stake claim to form government with Independents support

Haryana Election Results 2019 Released: Bhartiya Janata Party leader and CM Manohar Lal Khattar will soon stake claim to form government in Haryana with the support of all the 7 Independent candidates who have extended their support to the BJP. These seven Independents are - Ranjit Singh (Raina); Sombir (Dadri); Rakesh Daultabad (Badshahpur); Balraj Kundu (Meham); Dharam Pal Gonder (Nilokheri); and Nayan Pal Rawat (Prithla). BJP has secured victory in 40 seats; while Congress wins 31, JJP 10 and others are left with just 9 seats.

Haryana Election Results 2019 were unpredictable; none of the parties, especially BJP, could secure majority in the state. A party needed a minimum of 46 seats to form government in the state. Now, all eyes are set upon the Dushyant Chautala's Jannayak Janta Party (JJP) which is expected to come out as a King Maker, forming a coalition government with either BJP or Congress. Watch this space to know whose claim to form the government will be supported by the JJP.

Haryana CM Manohar Lal Khattar has won the elections from Karnal Constituency, while his rival Congress leader Bhupinder Singh Hooda won from the Garhi Sampla-Kiloi constituency. JJP's Dushyant Chautala emerged as a winner in Haryana Elections 2019 from Uchana Kalan constituency, defeating Prem Lata (BJP) and Balram Katwal (INC). Haryana Assembly Elections 2019 was held on October 21, 2019. A total of 90 candidates contested from the BJP, 90 from Congress, 87 from the BSP, 81 from Indian National Lok Dal (INLD), 375 are Independents, 4 are from the CPI, 7 from the CPM, 1 from NCP and 434 others. The election commission has revealed the final tally of the Haryana Elections 2019. Have a look:

Haryana Election Result 2019 Party Won Total Bharatiya Janata Party 40 40 Indian National Congress 31 31 Jannayak Janta Party 10 10 Independent 7 7 Indian National Lok Dal 1 1 Haryana Lokhit Party 1 1 Total 90 90

Catch all the Highlights of the Haryana State Assembly Election Result 2019 here.

Haryana Election Result Highlights @ 5:30 pm: As per the sources, CM Manohar Lal Khattar stakes the claim to form Government in Haryana. Soon, it will be revealed whether BJP forms Government in Haryana on its own by gaining majority or is it the JJP that emerges out as a King Maker.

Haryana Election Result Highlights @ 5:15 pm: Jannayak Janata Party (JJP) wins a total of 10 seats in Haryana. The party is projected to act as a King Maker, by forming a coalition government.

Haryana Election Result Highlights @ 4:45 pm: Bhupinder Singh Hooda wins the Garhi Sampla-Kiloi assembly seat by defeating BJP's Satish Nandal by a vote margin of 58,321 votes.

Haryana Election Result Highlights @ 4:00 pm: BJP wins 13 seats; Congress wins 10

The ECI declares the result of 30 seats of Haryana Assembly. As per the ECI result, BJP wins 13 seats; Congress wins 10, JJP wins 5 and others win 2. The BJP is leading ahead of Congress in the state.

ANI reports that the Haryana BJP chief Subhash Barala has not resigned from his post

Highlights @ 3:50 pm: Wrestler Babita Phogat from BJP lost the Haryana Elections 2019 from an Independent candidates Sombir in Dadri Constituency. She joined the BJP in August 2019.

Highlights @ 3:30 pm: Election Commission begins the declaration of the Haryana Election Results 2019. With the votes counted so far, BJP is winning in 12 constituencies, JJP in 5, Congress in 9 and others in 2.

Highlights @ 3:00 pm: BJP candidate & TikTok star Sonali Phogat lost to Congress's Kuldeep Bishnoi in Adampur constituency by 29,471 vote margin. Moreover, Haryana's Finance Minister Captain Abhimanyu lost from Narnaund constituency to Ram Kumar Gautam of JJP.

Haryana Election Result Highlights @ 2:15 pm: Congress DS Hooda asks Dushyant Chautala's Jannayak Janata Party; independent candidates and others to form a coalition government in Haryana. With Chautala demanding the CM Post of the state, it will be intriguing to know the final decision of the JJP.

Haryana Election Result Highlights @ 2:00 pm: Dushyant Chautala of Jannayak Janata Party emerges as a winner in Haryana Elections 2019 from Uchana Kalan constituency with a vote margin of 40213. Chautala defeats BJP's Prem Lata and Congress' Balram Katwal. On the other hand, Congress leader Randeep Surjewala conceded defeat in the assembly elections.

Highlights @ 1:30 : BJP Female MLAs face defeat: BJP's Kavita Jain loses the Sonipat seat from Surender Pawar of Congress; TikTok star Sonali Phogat loses from Adampur seat against Congress' Kuldeep Bishnoi and Latika Sharma loses against Congress Pardeep Chaudhary in Kalka seat.

Haryana Election Result Highlights @ 1:15 pm: BREAKING NEWS: Haryana BJP president Subhash Barala resigns, taking full responsibility of BJP's poor performance in Haryana Elections 2019. Barala is trailing behind JJP's Devender Singh Babli in Tohana constituency with a vote margin of over 25000. As per the sources, BJP Chief Amit Shah blew up Barala for the party's poor performance.

Haryana Election Result Highlights @ 12:55 pm: Equal contest between Congress & BJP in Haryana. The Election Commission updates show both Congress and BJP leading in 35 seats each - a close enough fight between the rivals. These numbers truly indicate the Hung Assembly in the state. Now, all eyes are set upon JJP Chief Dushyant Chautala decision regarding the coalition with BJP/Congress.

Haryana Election Result Highlights @ 12:00 noon: As per the official site of the Election Commission, the BJP is leading in 38 seats of Haryana, Congress in 32 seats, Jannayak Janta Party leads in 10 seats and others are leading in 10 seats. It would be a massive setback for BJP if it fails to garner a majority in Haryana. The current Haryana election results hint towards the Hung Assembly in Haryana. Here are the current Numbers:

Bharatiya Janata Party - 38

Indian National Congress - 32

Jannayak Janta Party - 10

Independent - 6

Indian National Lok Dal - 2

Bahujan Samaj Party – 1

Loktanter Suraksha Party – 1

Highlights @ 11:15 AM: Former Haryana CM Bhupinder Singh Hooda is leading ahead of BJP candidate Satish Nandal by 8,505 votes from Garhi Sampla-Kiloi constituency. On the other hand, incumbent Haryana CM Manohar Lal Khattar is leading over by 7,047 votes against his Congress rival Tarlochan Singh.

Haryana Election Result Highlights @ 10:40 AM: Haryana CM Manohar Lal Khattar leading with 14030 votes, after the third round of counting. On the other hand, JJP's Dushyant Chautala demands the post of Haryana Chief Minister from Congress, if the former turns out to be the King Maker.

Highlights @ 10:10 AM: Senior Congress leader Bhupinder Singh Hooda was seen visiting a counting centre in Haryana, commenting "Congress ka bahumat ayega". Hooda is leading towards the victory from Garhi Sampla-Kiloi constituency in Haryana elections 2019. Here we have shared the picture posted by the ANI on its twitter handle.

Highlights @ 9:55 AM: Results of the first round of voting are out. As per these results, Haryana Chief Minister Manohar Lal Khattar is leading from Karnal seat with 4588 votes counted so far in the first round of counting. Congress' Tarlochan Singh is leading from Tarn Taran constituency.

Highlights @ 9:40 AM: BJP's numbers fall again; leading in 40 seats now. Congress leads in 36 Haryana seats. These numbers indicate that India Today-Axis My India Exit Poll prediction might come out to be true. As per Axis exit poll, Congress might win 30-42 seats, while BJP would win 32-44 seats. Congress' claim to form government in the state could be supported by the JJP, the King Maker.

Haryana Election Result Highlights @ 9:30 AM: A political party needs 46 seats to gain majority in Haryana and form the government. So far, the BJP is leading in 44 seats, needing just 2 seats to gain majority. On the other hand, Congress is leading in 32 seats, however, parties like JJP, INLD and Others can come out to be a King Maker by forming a coalition with the Congress.

Highlights @ 9:20 AM: Haryana is witnessing a sea-saw battle in the assembly polls. Congress is leading in 32 constituencies, while the BJP's lead is reduced to 44 seats. BJP's OP Dhankar and Captain Abhimanyu are trailing.

Highlights @ 9:15 AM: JJP's Dushyant Chautala comments, "JJP will form Haryana government". He says that neither Congress nor the BJP will be winning in Haryana; the sole power will be in hands of the Jannayak Janta Party. Chautala is currently leading in the Haryana polls from Uchana Kalan constituency.

Highlights @ 9:10 AM: Congress is seen giving a tough fight to the BJP in Haryana. As per the recent trends, Congress is leading in over 25 constituencies of Haryana. On the other hand, BJP is leading in over 50 seats. It will be interesting to watch will Congress be able to give a tough fight to Khattar’s BJP Government?

Highlights @ 8:55 AM: Star power can be seen in Haryana with wrestler Babita Phogat leading in Dadri constituency of Haryana. However, TikTok star Sonali Phogat of BJP is trailing behind Kuldeep Bishnoi of Congress. Even BJP's Captain Abhimanyu and Ram Bilas Sharma are trailing behind in their respective constituencies.

Also Read | Exit Poll Haryana 2019: See-Saw battle between BJP & Congress in Haryana, projects Axis My India

Haryana Election Result Highlights @ 8:42 AM: Captain Abhimanyu of BJP leading in Narnaud; Tiktok Star Sonali Phogat is trailing in Adampur; Babita Phogat leading in Dadri; have a look at the leading candidates:

Constituency Leading Candidates Panchkula Gyan Chand Gupta (BJP) Kaithal Lila Ram Gurjar (BJP) Karnal Manohar Lal Khattar (BJP) Tosham Kiran Chaudhury (INC) Garhi Sampla-Kiloi Bhupinder Singh Hooda (Congress) Adampur Kuldeep Bishnoi (Congress) Ellenabad Pawan Beniwal (BJP) Uchana Kalan Dushyant Chautala (JJP) Narnaund Captain Abhimanyu (BJP) Ambala Cantonment Anil Vij (BJP) Baroda Yogeshwar Dutt (BJP) Dadri Babita Phogat (BJP) Pehowa Sandeep Singh (BJP) Tohana Subhash Barala (BJP) Gurugram Sudhir Singla (BJP) Badra Naina Chautala (JJP)

Haryana Election Result Highlights @ 8:35 AM: BJP is just 4 seats behind to gain the majority in Haryana. As per the recent updates, the BJP is leading in 42 constituencies of 90-seats Haryana Assembly.

BJP - 42

Congress - 10

JJP - 2

Others - 1

Highlights @ 8:25 AM: Naina Chautala of the Jannayak Janta Party is leading in Badhra constituency. BJP is just 14 seats away to gain the majority in Haryana.

Highlights @ 8:20 AM: Bhartiya Janata Party is leading in all the four seats of Gurugram, Haryana. Abhay Chautala of INLD is leading in the Ellenabad, Sirsa and JJP's Dushyant Chautala is leading in Uchana Kalan constituency.

Highlights @ 8:18 AM: BJP is leading in Haryana Assembly Polls. Here are the updated numbers of all the parties: BJP is leading in 28 seats; Congress in 4 seats, JJP in 1 seat and Others are leading in 1 seat. BJP's OP Dhankar is leading in Jhajjar.

Haryana Election Result Highlights @ 8:15 AM: BJP & Congress head for a strong fight. CM Khattar is leading from Karnal and Congress leader Bhupinder Singh Hooda is leading in the Garhi Sampla-Kiloi constituency.

Highlights @ 8:11 AM: Congress leading in Bhiwani

Highlights @ 8:10 AM: BJP leading in Haryana with 6 seats - Bhiwani, Assandh, Gharaunda, Pataudi

Highlights @ 8:00 AM: Counting begins for #Haryana AssemblyPolls.

Highlights @ 7:55 AM: Counting of votes begins in 5 minutes

The Chief Electoral Officer of Haryana will begin the votes counting in 5 minutes. stay tuned.

Haryana Election Result 2019 Highlights @ 7:40 AM: Counting of votes for begins at 8 am. Here are the visuals of the counting centre in Jind, Haryana, as shared by the ANI .

Haryana Election Result 2019 Highlights @ 7:15 AM: Wrestler Babita Phogat who is contesting from Dadri constituency shares with the ANI "People have given me love and support, that is my strength, & what keeps me going. I have faith in public and myself, people will give blessings to their daughter."

Haryana Election Result 2019 Highlights @ 7:00 AM: While most of the exit polls such as Jan Ki Baat & Republic C Voter predicted a landslide victory for the BJP, India Today-Axis My India exit poll predicted a close fight between Congress & BJP.

Haryana Election Result 2019 Highlights @ 6:45 AM: The 90-seat Haryana Assembly Elections were held alongside Maharashtra on October 21. The Elections witnessed a voter turnout of 68.31% till 6:00 PM, when the polling concluded.

Haryana Election Result 2019 Highlights @ 6:30 AM: Expected List of Winners: Exit Polls Prediction

Constituency Projected Winner Panchkula Gyan Chand Gupta (BJP) Kaithal Lila Ram Gurjar (BJP) Karnal Manohar Lal Khattar (BJP) Tosham – Kiran Chaudhury (INC) Garhi Sampla-Kiloi Bhupinder Singh Hooda (Congress) Adampur Kuldeep Bishnoi (Congress) Ellenabad Pawan Beniwal (BJP) Uchana Kalan Dushyant Chautala (JJP) Narnaund Captain Abhimanyu (BJP) Ambala Cantonment Anil Vij (BJP) Baroda Yogeshwar Dutt (BJP) Dadri Babita Phogat (BJP) Pehowa Sandeep Singh (BJP) Tohana Subhash Barala (BJP) Gurugram Sudhir Singla (BJP) Badra Naina Chautala (JJP)

Haryana Assembly Election 2019: All You Need to Know - Full Schedule & Key Constituencies
