Tiger Global: Under Scott Shleifer, Tiger Global is roaring back with big bets

The fund’s exit from Flipkart gave it $3 billion in return, last year. The transaction cut its India exposure by almost 50% because of the liquidity event.

Add to that its secondaries in Ola, PolicyBazaar, Delhivery, and write-offs like ShopClues where it had pumped $100 million.

Tiger which operates both hedge fund and private venture investments has seen its assets under management swell to $36 billion this year, an 80% increase since May 2015, as per Crunchbase.

Even if you take the $500-600 million investments this year, Tiger has barely been able to shore up its exposure to India on an overall fund basis.

Having racked up $3.8 billion last year under Tiger Global Private Investment Partners XI, there’s pressure to deploy in India, historically an important market for the fund.

There is an understanding in the fund about not backing companies that have already reached a valuation of $1 billion or more.

People close to Tiger say a lot of the 2014-15 investments were larger-- $100 million or more-- in more mature startups.

They say the 2019 investments, on the other hand, have been relatively smaller sized in less expensive firms.

The idea is that these companies won’t need any external capital in the next 5 years as they will be profitable.

While this is what I understood about Tiger’s bullishness, there is another view in the industry that says they are propping up valuations even as they secure their India exposure.

Making investment decisions over a few phone calls

Often moving valuations of startups by 50-100%

Wiring funds before documentation was complete (even before Term sheets were signed in a couple of cases)

But to his (Shleifer’s) credit, he seems to have done reasonable research on the companies, key metrics before the call.

He's building a SaaS index fund in anticipation of the likes of Freshworks going public.

The point to remember is that Tiger Global has been one of the top-performing hedge funds globally, generating annualized returns of 17.8%, as per filings made with the Securities and Exchange Commission. And for all the frothiness that it was responsible for in 2015 - it did come off taking $3 billion out of Flipkart, possibly the largest venture return in India.

While it is clear Shleifer is taking bolder wagers when compared to Fixel, the original bull of the Indian consumer internet market, the broader picture may emerge only after some time as to what his investing thesis is for India.

MUMBAI:There’s a consensus in the Indian technology investing world today that the 2015 funding euphoria led by Lee Fixel , who was at the helm of Tiger Global then was far more “subdued” compared to what we are seeing today.Famously known as the Maharaja (king of kings) of Indian e-commerce for his undeterred backing of Flipkart, Fixel stepped down from Tiger Global earlier this year and Scott Shleifer took charge of India at the New York-headquartered fund famous for being secretive and media-shy.The 41-year-old China specialist has since then infused unbridled exuberance as well as equal amounts of skepticism among key stakeholders in the local private tech investing world. He’s made more than 20 new and follow-on investments in nine months of this year, out of these Tiger led or co-led 15-18 of these financing rounds, as per data collated by Tracxn, a research platform.What’s been the talking point is the contrasting sentiment in the broader economy reflected through the macroeconomic indicators, which haven’t had any impact on the bullishness of Tiger and a pack of investors.Risk investors of all scale and size and even founders, admit to how valuations are touching dizzying heights, idea-stage startups are being handed over $15-20 million cheques by slicing and dicing the market especially in the B2B sector.This is eventually going to lead to a lot of grief for many companies when they go out to raise follow on rounds, is the general view especially keeping in mind the uncertainty around SoftBank’s second Vision Fund after the botched up IPO of its famed portfolio company WeWork.A few months back, I wrote about Shleifer and how he compared to Fixel but since then half a dozen more startups have been funded by Tiger.Let’s step back to understand what could have possibly led to Tiger’s comeback to the Indian private tech investing market?A growth-stage investor told me recently, how Tiger’s aggressiveness was forcing other funds to take quicker decisions and was making them look at companies much earlier than before. “One would wait for some more proof of sales, but now you don’t have that luxury with Tiger’s aggressive bets,” he said. Another veteran venture investor who’d seen the 1999-2000 tech bust in the US, said he fears India is heading that way.What happened in 2015 was far more concentrated in terms of the capital that went into younger companies. Also, there were fewer funds and hardly any second or third-time entrepreneurs for investors like Tiger to bet on. While what we’ve seen in the last six-eight months is a flurry of new types of investors and heaps of repeat founders getting financed at valuations which are very rich, which we have been writing about in recent months.“It has surely gotten the likes of Sequoia Capital, Accel, Matrix Partners, Lightspeed and even the smaller early-stage and seed funds to be far more active,” said a venture capitalist. Hedge funds like Steadview Capital and sector-specific investors like Ribbit Capital, which is fintech focussed, too have been extremely aggressive.A venture capital investor recently listed out a quick few points to understand how Shleifer was going about with his dealmaking.Sample Tiger’s first wave of investments this year, enterprise and SaaS startups, many of which had not raised any capital for a few years like Zenoti. Then came some consumer internet companies like UrbanClap, where the services marketplace is closing in on a $1 billion valuation and the most talked-about one was Wow! Momo, a quick-service restaurant (QSR) chain, just because it is such a different space for Tiger to invest in.
