Exam ‘ruse’ to lure students back to empty universities

INDIA Exam ‘ruse’ to lure students back to empty universities Tweet



Universities and colleges were



Talat Parvez Rohella, secretary for higher education in Kashmir, said exams that had previously been scheduled for August will now start from the last week of October and if students don’t come, they will lose six months.



But there would be huge logistical problems in attempting to hold the examinations in the current situation.



Kashmir has been reeling under heavy lockdown since 5 August when the Indian government abrogated its semi-autonomous status. Although government has ordered relaxations in curfews and allowed limited communications in recent days, the region is effectively on an indefinite strike in protest against the abrogation.



Schools, colleges and universities have been unable to function for the past 80 days. After announcing the opening of schools twice in the last two months and reopening colleges and universities on 9 October, the government hoped opening educational institutions would help break the general strike.



Now the government has announced examinations will be held from school to postgraduate level in a bid to involve every school, college and university. Their calculation is that students will find it difficult to miss their annual and semester exams, experts say.



The hope is that this will also minimise the chances of student protests as students would be occupied with preparing for exams.



A similar plan worked in 2016 when Kashmir was hit by a wave of protests in the aftermath of the killing of popular militant commander Burhan Wani. Kashmir was shut down for almost six months. School and university examinations were announced, forcing students to attend classes, which helped break the cycle of protests.



However, there is the possibility of opposition to the examinations by militant organisations. The Times of India newspaper reported that Hizbul Mujahideen, the region’s biggest militant organisation, had pasted posters near some schools in Srinagar warning against holding examinations. The posters were immediately removed by police, but the news got out, further complicating the situation.



“It is like a war. Never, ever have we seen such a situation,” said a prominent Kashmiri educationist who wished not to be named.



“The government has politicised education and they want to project normalcy in Kashmir by holding examinations. They don’t care about the safety of students; their only aim is to break the strike. Otherwise all exams could be held in March, as we have seen happening previously.”



Warnings from government



The government has made it clear that there will be no postponement of exams or even reduction in syllabus requirements. The undergraduate fourth-year exams will start from 28 October and for other years exams will be held in the following weeks.



Rohella told local Kashmir newspapers that transport would be made available for students to get to exam centres. Public transport continues to be disrupted, with most vehicles off the roads.



There have been veiled warnings from government that if students do not sit their exams, they will be failed, even though government curbs – including an internet shut down and only partial restoration of mobile services – are not being lifted.



Institutions face other hurdles. The government refused to allow Kashmir University to reactivate its data centre so that students could submit examination forms and download admissions cards online. This is despite an undertaking to the government by the university that if a limited internet service was restored at the university, it would only be used for the paperwork required from students.



The internet is tightly controlled in the entire region, with only a handful of government kiosks providing access to limited users under strict watch.



“As internet services remain blocked, we will have to submit tens of thousands of examination forms manually like we used to do in the pre-internet era. It is a cumbersome process and with chances of error, but we have no option,” said a Kashmir University official.



“Not all phones are working so students have to come to colleges and universities to fill in all forms and complete all formalities by hand.”



Exam control rooms



Aware of the challenges of holding exams, the government has enhanced the deployment of security forces around universities, colleges and schools – some 160,000 school students will be sitting Board of School Education exams at 1,502 centres in the Kashmir valley.



For the first time, the government announced on 22 October the setting up of district-level ‘Exam Control Rooms’ in every district of Kashmir, comprising district officers from the education department, transport department, revenue and police to monitor and review examination arrangements on a daily basis and ensure their smooth functioning and the safety of students.



A security cordon will surround each examination centre and ambulances will also be on hand.



A recent high-level official meeting on education in Srinagar revealed the tight government control over education institutions. “A magistrate shall be provided to every education institution for smooth functioning of the schools, colleges and universities,” read the minutes of the meeting.



On 9 October, when government tried but failed to open colleges and universities, it had directed the principals of institutions to include local police officers in their meetings to prepare for reopening.



Experts fear that excessive interference and politicisation of education could boomerang for the government.



“First of all, they [students] don’t have the right to express themselves. How does government think that deputing magistrates, installing CCTVs on campuses, securing them with extra security forces and forcing them [students] to undertake examinations suddenly after around three months of complete closure, will help in any way,” said the educationist, predicting it would only lead to suppressed anger “that could explode at any time”.



The provincial government in Indian-administered Kashmir has come up with a plan to use examinations as a tool to force students’ return to colleges and universities and project an image of a normal Kashmir.Universities and colleges were reopened recently but most students are still refraining from attending classes.Talat Parvez Rohella, secretary for higher education in Kashmir, said exams that had previously been scheduled for August will now start from the last week of October and if students don’t come, they will lose six months.But there would be huge logistical problems in attempting to hold the examinations in the current situation.Kashmir has been reeling under heavy lockdown since 5 August when the Indian government abrogated its semi-autonomous status. Although government has ordered relaxations in curfews and allowed limited communications in recent days, the region is effectively on an indefinite strike in protest against the abrogation.Schools, colleges and universities have been unable to function for the past 80 days. After announcing the opening of schools twice in the last two months and reopening colleges and universities on 9 October, the government hoped opening educational institutions would help break the general strike.Now the government has announced examinations will be held from school to postgraduate level in a bid to involve every school, college and university. Their calculation is that students will find it difficult to miss their annual and semester exams, experts say.The hope is that this will also minimise the chances of student protests as students would be occupied with preparing for exams.A similar plan worked in 2016 when Kashmir was hit by a wave of protests in the aftermath of the killing of popular militant commander Burhan Wani. Kashmir was shut down for almost six months. School and university examinations were announced, forcing students to attend classes, which helped break the cycle of protests.However, there is the possibility of opposition to the examinations by militant organisations. Thenewspaper reported that Hizbul Mujahideen, the region’s biggest militant organisation, had pasted posters near some schools in Srinagar warning against holding examinations. The posters were immediately removed by police, but the news got out, further complicating the situation.“It is like a war. Never, ever have we seen such a situation,” said a prominent Kashmiri educationist who wished not to be named.“The government has politicised education and they want to project normalcy in Kashmir by holding examinations. They don’t care about the safety of students; their only aim is to break the strike. Otherwise all exams could be held in March, as we have seen happening previously.”The government has made it clear that there will be no postponement of exams or even reduction in syllabus requirements. The undergraduate fourth-year exams will start from 28 October and for other years exams will be held in the following weeks.Rohella told local Kashmir newspapers that transport would be made available for students to get to exam centres. Public transport continues to be disrupted, with most vehicles off the roads.There have been veiled warnings from government that if students do not sit their exams, they will be failed, even though government curbs – including an internet shut down and only partial restoration of mobile services – are not being lifted.Institutions face other hurdles. The government refused to allow Kashmir University to reactivate its data centre so that students could submit examination forms and download admissions cards online. This is despite an undertaking to the government by the university that if a limited internet service was restored at the university, it would only be used for the paperwork required from students.The internet is tightly controlled in the entire region, with only a handful of government kiosks providing access to limited users under strict watch.“As internet services remain blocked, we will have to submit tens of thousands of examination forms manually like we used to do in the pre-internet era. It is a cumbersome process and with chances of error, but we have no option,” said a Kashmir University official.“Not all phones are working so students have to come to colleges and universities to fill in all forms and complete all formalities by hand.”Aware of the challenges of holding exams, the government has enhanced the deployment of security forces around universities, colleges and schools – some 160,000 school students will be sitting Board of School Education exams at 1,502 centres in the Kashmir valley.For the first time, the government announced on 22 October the setting up of district-level ‘Exam Control Rooms’ in every district of Kashmir, comprising district officers from the education department, transport department, revenue and police to monitor and review examination arrangements on a daily basis and ensure their smooth functioning and the safety of students.A security cordon will surround each examination centre and ambulances will also be on hand.A recent high-level official meeting on education in Srinagar revealed the tight government control over education institutions. “A magistrate shall be provided to every education institution for smooth functioning of the schools, colleges and universities,” read the minutes of the meeting.On 9 October, when government tried but failed to open colleges and universities, it had directed the principals of institutions to include local police officers in their meetings to prepare for reopening.Experts fear that excessive interference and politicisation of education could boomerang for the government.“First of all, they [students] don’t have the right to express themselves. How does government think that deputing magistrates, installing CCTVs on campuses, securing them with extra security forces and forcing them [students] to undertake examinations suddenly after around three months of complete closure, will help in any way,” said the educationist, predicting it would only lead to suppressed anger “that could explode at any time”. Follow University World News on Facebook

Receive UWN's free weekly e-newsletters
