Amid spike in dengue cases, doctors in TN launch indefinite strike over salaries

Amid spike in dengue cases, doctors in TN launch indefinite strike over salaries

Doctors belonging to various associations in the state will only attend emergencies from Friday.

news Strike

Thousands of government doctors from Tamil Nadu are on an indefinite strike from Friday, demanding pay parity with their central government counterparts. Doctors, affiliated to various groups under The Federation of Government Doctors Association, will only be attending emergency cases at their respective hospitals. They will not be available for regular in-patient or out-patient duty. With a dengue outbreak underway in the state, the government has warned doctors against striking.

The medicos' demands include the implementation of the Dynamic Assured Career Progression (DACP) norms that mandate uniformity in salary and promotions. At the end of 13 years of service, the scheme assures salary at Pay Band-4. Per the scheme, doctors would receive time-bound promotions in their 4th, 9th and 13th year of service. They have also sought the maintenance of doctors’ posts corresponding to the number of patients, a 50 per cent service reservation in post-graduate admissions, and counselling for post-graduate postings.

According to one report in The Hindu, the doctors’ association has expressed disappointment at the matter not having been resolved after the six-week period requested by the government.

Meanwhile, the Directorate of Medical Education (DME) has issued circulars monitoring doctors' absences and warning them regarding striking from service. As per a report in the Times of India, Director of Public Health, Dr K Kolandasamy reminded the doctors that a fever outbreak was underway in the state with a spike in reports of dengue. With MBBS doctors going on leave, he warned that it would take them two years to be eligible for post-graduate courses since the absence would be counted as a break in service.

In August this year, six government doctors had gone on a hunger strike at the Rajiv Gandhi Government General Hospital in Chennai. Soon after the protest received support, state Health Minister C Vijayabaskar spoke to striking doctors at the Secretariat and sought time to address their issues.
