Why global warming has left Kerala vulnerable | India Today Insight

For centuries, Kerala's geography was its USP. It was blessed with moderate climate and scenic locations. The narrow strip of land, 35 to 125 km wide and 580 km long, is wedged between the Western Ghats and Arabian Sea. The state had never bothered about global warming induced climatic changes, but the consecutive floods in August 2018 and 2019 have prompted a rethink. The 2018 August floods, the worst in about a century, destroyed Rs 31,000 crore worth of infrastructure and livelihoods and killed 453 persons. This year too, floods caused by the southwest monsoon have played havoc in the state. Till now, 121 lives have been claimed by the floods and another 21 are reported missing after the northern parts of Kerala were hit by the monsoon fury. Massive landslides were reported in Wayanad, Palakkad and Malappuram districts. Over the last few days, Kochi, the state's commercial capital, was flooded during the northeast monsoon, a phenomenon never experienced in the past.

The India Meteorological Department data reveals that the 2,309.8 mm rainfall the state received was 13 per cent more than normal for the southwest monsoon and the 326.5 mm rainfall the state received from October 1 to 23 was 40 per cent above normal. "This year, the southwest monsoon overran to mid-October and the northeast monsoon set in without a break. The monsoon calendar has changed and its intensity too," says an IMD official who did not want to be named.

MORE FROM INSIGHT | The formula that won BJP Maharashtra and Haryana

In a time of global warming, believed to cause disruptions in weather, the state is now left feeling vulnerable. The changes in monsoon pattern and characteristics indicate global warming aftershocks in the whole of south India. Meteorologists fear that the trend may adversely affect Kerala in future with floods and droughts. Drastic climate changes and frequent seasonal calamities are adversely affecting the livelihood of the people of the state. Agriculture, fisheries and tourism, which together account for 30 per cent of the state's GDP, are the worst-affected sectors. Kerala, with a revenue deficit of Rs 12,860 crore and annual fiscal deficit of Rs 23,957 crore, has already spent an extra Rs 6,500 crore on disaster management since 2018.

The 2018 floods changed the social perception and mindset. Chief Minister Pinarayi Vijayan, a critic of eco-activism, might have been the first to sense trouble. He announced that the state needs to frame reasonable restrictions to survive future calamities and appealed for an eco-friendly living.

There are reasons for concern. Massive deforestation, topographical changes adversely affecting land use pattern, urbanisation without minimum restrictions and encroachments in riverbeds have contributed to Kerala's current misery. Over the years, Kerala's soil has lost its basic texture and water retention capacity leading to soil piping phenomenon which occurs when water erodes beneath the surface of the ground creating an underground tunnel known as soil pipe. These tunnels collapse leading to more erosion.

MORE FROM INSIGHT | Why are the Ranthambore tigers killing more and more humans?

Dr. Sekhar Lukose Kuriakose who heads the Kerala Disaster Management Authority, says that such calamities are unavoidable. "We can only manage it with proper planning, meticulous action and hard decisions," he says. After the 2018 deluge, the state government charted an action plan for emergency situations and trained more than 2,000 volunteers, including fishermen, for rescue and relief operations during the floods and issued guidelines for proper dam management in the state. The government has started constructing community shelters across the state.

The floods may have changed community perceptions in the state. "Kerala community came together to meet the challenges of calamities. It's the best positive response model the state has ever created," says Kuriakose. During the floods, Kerala fishermen volunteered, risking their lives, for rescue operations and saved hundreds of people. Floods united the people of Kerala who set aside their political and caste differences to meet challenges.

But there are concerns that local bodies are slow to respond to climate challenges. The rainfall, which hit Kochi on October 21, caused many low-lying parts under the Kochi Municipal Corporation to be waterlogged for three days as stormwater drains had not been cleaned on time. On October 23, Vijayan directed the district collector, Ernakulam, and the police to initiate emergency action to clear water blocks in the city. The district administration launched 'operation breakthrough' with the support of local volunteers and cleaned main water drainages in Kochi. This seems to be the new reality of Kerala, emergency action becoming a permanent feature for the state.

ALSO READ | Over 2,100 dead in monsoon rains, floods across India

ALSO READ | Why Bihar flood is a warning sign for Nitish Kumar

ALSO READ | Why houseboats are sinking in Kerala

ALSO WATCH | Kerala floods a man-made disaster?


