Top wealth destroyers of Samvat 2075 include names beyond usual suspects

Stock Analysis – Know before investing Stock score of Reliance Power Ltd moved up by 1 in a week on a 10-point scale. Subscribe Now Exclusively for

Stock Analysis Stock score of Reliance Power Ltd is 6 on a scale of 10. View Stock Analysis »

Mumbai: Samvat 2075 saw a barrage of wealth destructors, which eroded thousands of crores of equity investors’ wealth amid the crisis in NBFC space, a series of rating downgrades, payment delays, defaults, demand slowdown and several corporate governance crises.“Excessive leverage is one area investors need to watch out for to steer clear of wealth destructors,” said market veterans.Of the 2,668 actively traded stocks on BSE, 2,102 stocks shed value during Samvat 2075, indicating very weak market breadth, with only a handful of stocks logging gains for the Hindu accounting year that ends on Saturday.Some 32 stocks eroded 90 per cent of their values during Samvat 2075. Barring eight companies, the remaining 24 tested record low levels in October.As many as 99 companies eroded 80 per cent or more value, while 632 shed 50 per cent or more. The wealth destruction was caused not only by a drop in market capitalisation, but also due to adjustments for fresh equity issuance, mergers, demergers and share buybacks.The stock that shed the most value was tour operator Cox & Kings, which eroded 98.5 per cent of its value, hit by a cash crunch, leading to tour cancelations, layoffs and slew of credit rating downgrades.Other stocks that eroded 90 per cent or more value included Talwalkars Healthclubs, Mercator, Mcleod Russel India, Reliance Communications, Reliance Capital, Talwalkars Better Value Fitness, Reliance Infrastructure, Jet Airways (India), Manpasand Beverages, Reliance Home Finance,, Sintex Plastics , Ballarpur Industries , Sintex Industries, Diligent Media Corporation, Binani Industries, Dewan Housing Finance Corporation, Punj Lloyd and Housing Development & Infrastructure, among others.The list largely included stocks where leverage was very high, leading to default or delay in debt repayment. In some cases, corporate governance issues led to hammering of the stocks.“In the Indian milieu, assumption of excessive debt is always frowned upon. The crux in all these cases is excessive leverage,” said Ajay Bodke, CEO for PMS at Prabhudas Lilladher.“In their hay days, these companies threw caution to the wind, and assumed excessive risk by borrowing. It was a classic Waterloo context,” he said.Bodke said excessive debt should be one area investors should watch out for while investing. “Everything in moderation in fine, when it crosses the limit, it should ring the alarm bells,” he said.Anil Ambani group stocks Reliance Communications fell 94.64 per cent, Reliance Infrastructure 93.9 per cent, Reliance Power 92.46 per cent, Reliance Home Finance 92.56 per cent and Reliance Capital 94.61 per cent.Shares of Naresh Goyal’s Jet Airways, which was grounded in April, fell 93.8 per cent. Manpasad Beverages, once a darling of certain fund houses, saw its shares tank 93.40 per cent. The company saw three auditor exits in last 16 months and its directors were sent behind bars for an alleged tax fraud. The scrip will be delisted from the bourses from November 4.The crisis-hit DHFL, which has been marred by rating downgrades and defaults, has nosedived 90.6 per cent.Retail investor interest in many of these ‘falling knives’ is so much that their aggregate holdings have climbed multiple times in last few quarters to hit record levels. Analysts do not see chances of many of these stocks reverting to mean anytime soon. They say some of these stocks may see permanent derating.Market veteran Madhu Kela said he had not seen this kind of wealth destruction before. Not even in 2008.“I have not seen this level of wealth destruction and some of them are not necessarily bad businesses or bad managements. It is just that they have got caught in the leverage,” Kela told ETNOW.“Promoters have got leverage. They could not get refinance so their shares got sold. In some cases, business entered into a vicious cycle after failing to get refinance. A third category of companies has a lot of money pending with the government and now if the government does not pay them money, how do you pay the banks?” Kela asked.“The cycle has been very-very vicious this time around. There is humongous amount of wealth destruction,” he said.
