Trumka: What’s the rush with USMCA?

Trumka: What’s the rush with USMCA?

With help from Sabrina Rodriguez and Doug Palmer

Editor’s Note: This edition of Morning Trade is published weekdays at 10 a.m. POLITICO Pro Trade subscribers hold exclusive early access to the newsletter each morning at 6 a.m. Learn more about POLITICO Pro’s comprehensive policy intelligence coverage, policy tools and services, at politicopro.com.

Quick Fix

— The head of America’s largest labor organization dismissed the idea that the time for House Democrats to pass the USMCA is now or never, and said there’s a plan in the works to ensure Mexico keeps its commitments on labor reform.

— U.S. Trade Representative Robert Lighthizer backed off a planned recommendation to restore some trade benefits to Ukraine after being told President Donald Trump wouldn’t like helping Kiev, a new report says. The incident offers the first indication that the growing Ukraine scandal could seep into the trade arena.

— A forthcoming government watchdog report warns Congress about the safety and reliability of some Chinese pharma imports.

IT’S FRIDAY, OCT. 25! Welcome to Morning Trade, where your host is wondering what the best trade-themed Halloween costume ideas making the rounds this year are. Let me know: [email protected] or @mmcassella.

Driving the Day

TRUMKA: WHAT’S THE RUSH WITH USMCA? AFL-CIO President Richard Trumka on Thursday evening shut down any insinuation that the chances of passing the USMCA are slim if Congress does not approve it this year. He said House Ways and Means Chairman Richard Neal and Democrats tasked with securing changes to the pact are not going to strike a deal with Lighthizer until the USMCA is strongly enforceable.

“What’s magic about this year?” Trumka asked reporters following a speech at the University of the District of Columbia’s law school.

“I don’t care whether it’s November, December, January or November of next year. When the agreement is worthy of the American people, we’ll vote on it. And if it isn’t, we’ll oppose it,” he added.

Trumka emphasized that USMCA negotiations should not have an artificial deadline, adding that he talks to Lighthizer all the time and he has seen “some movement” in the USMCA working group’s negotiations with the trade chief.

Support from Trumka and other labor leaders is likely key to getting enough Democrats to vote for the USMCA.

An eye on Mexico: The U.S. labor leader explained that he remains concerned that Mexico is not fully equipped to implement its major labor reforms, but he credited Mexican President Andrés Manuel López Obrador for showing “good faith.” Trumka said there’s discussion about a potential plan to ensure that Mexico implements its reforms that would target big employers in the auto industry and show that the government can undo protection contracts and ensure workers have unions that represent them.

“The Italians have a saying: To trust is good. To not trust is better," Trumka said. "Enough with the trust. Show us something."

GROWING UKRAINE SCANDAL BRIDGES INTO TRADE: The Washington Post reported Thursday that Lighthizer withdrew a request to restore some trade benefits to Ukraine under the Generalized System of Preferences program after John Bolton, who was the White House national security adviser at the time, warned him that Trump would likely oppose anything that might help Kiev.

The report, which the newspaper said was based on conversations with 10 unnamed current and former administration officials, said Lighthizer was convinced to back off his request in late August, at the same time the White House was withholding $391 million in military aid and security assistance to Ukraine — the action that prompted House Democrats to launch an impeachment inquiry into Trump.

The development suggests for the first time that the White House’s actions against Ukraine could involve more than just the military and security assistance Congress is already investigating. And it raises a question as to whether Lighthizer may now be involved in the House’s impeachment inquiry — and how that could affect the broader Trump trade agenda.

The convoluted backstory: The U.S. and Ukraine have for years had a rocky trade relationship, and both the George W. Bush and Barack Obama administrations imposed sanctions on the country because of intellectual property rights theft. Trump then moved in December 2017 to partially suspend trade benefits for Ukraine under GSP, a program that waives duties on goods from developing countries to help create jobs.

USTR announced earlier this month that officials are expected to travel to Ukraine in November for an annual meeting aimed and expanding trade and investment ties. An obvious topic of discussion would be whether Kiev has made enough progress in changing its trade practices to merit a restoration of benefits under GSP.

Agency spokespeople did not respond at the time to questions from Morning Trade about whether it believed the country made enough progress to justify reversing the December 2017 decision.

TRUMP MAY NOT TOP OBAMA’S AG EXPORT RECORD TO CHINA: U.S. exports of agriculture and related products to China soared after Beijing joined the World Trade Organization, rising from $2.96 billion in 2001 to a record $29 billion in 2012, when Obama was president, a USDA database shows.

A Bloomberg story on Thursday, quoting “people familiar with the matter,” said China aims to buy at least $20 billion worth of U.S. farm products in 2020 if it signs a partial trade deal with the United States in coming weeks. That would be double last year’s $10.6 billion, but below $25.2 billion during Obama’s last year in office in 2016.

Two weeks ago, when Trump announced his intention to reach a “phase one” deal with Beijing, the expectation was that China would make record purchases in 2020 and ramp up purchases to $40 billion to $50 billion annually in 2021 and beyond.

The indication that Chinese officials are now talking about only $20 billion worth of purchases in 2020 could be a warning to Trump that Beijing would purchase less if it doesn’t get everything it wants out of the phase one deal, said Derek Scissors, a China expert with the American Enterprise Institute.

“I read the more recent Chinese number as a little bit of a tweak: Don’t take our purchases for granted. You give us a little less, you get a little less,” Scissors said.

CHINA COMMISSION TO RING THE ALARM ON PHARMA IMPORTS: The U.S.-China Economic and Security Review Commission will raise concerns in a report scheduled to be published in November about the safety and reliability of Chinese pharmaceutical imports, Pro Trade’s Doug Palmer reports. The commission warns the imports are not effectively regulated in China.

The draft report shows the commission will recommend tasking drug companies to list the country of origin for active pharmaceutical ingredients and to make importers liable for any negative effects those APIs could cause. The U.S. imports roughly 80 percent of all APIs used in domestic production of pharmaceuticals from China, India and other countries.

The report warns that the dependence on Chinese supplies, which lack health and safety regulation, puts Americans “at the risk of exposure to contaminated and dangerous medicines.”

TACKLING THE OVERCAPACITY PROBLEM: A bipartisan group of more than two dozen House lawmakers is asking Commerce Secretary Wilbur Ross to set up a system for monitoring all aluminum imports to the United States.

In a letter dated Wednesday and released Thursday, 27 members of Congress said such a program would help “address aluminum misclassification, transshipment and evasion of duties” and “swiftly address illegal activity.” The goal would be largely to address Chinese overcapacity of aluminum and its export of subsidized aluminum products that disrupt the global market, they wrote.

Reps. Suzan DelBene (D-Wash.), Larry Bucshon (R-Ind.), Dave Loebsack (D-Iowa) and Bill Johnson (R-Ohio), the co-chairs of the Congressional Aluminum Caucus, spearheaded the letter.

Senators urge focus on steel: A bipartisan group of four senators, meanwhile, called on Lighthizer on Thursday to prioritize reducing overcapacity in steel by pushing to extend the mandate for the Global Forum on Steel Excess Capacity.

Sens. Rob Portman (R-Ohio), Sherrod Brown (D-Ohio), Mike Braun (R-Ind.), and Bob Casey (D-Pa.) wrote in the letter to USTR that the forum has “an important role to play” in addressing the problem and in bringing nations together to confront China’s increasing capacity and production.

BUT HIS EMAILS: Ross is the subject of a new investigation by the National Archives and Records Administration examining his use of private email for official business, according to a letter made public this week. An Archives official wrote to Jennifer Jessup, Commerce’s chief information officer, earlier this month that NARA is looking into “a potential unauthorized disposition of U.S. Department of Commerce records.”

The new probe follows the publication of a Washington Post profile late last month that revealed Ross used his private account to send or receive emails about discussions with the European Commission for Trade, among other things.

International Overnight

— Rep. Tim Ryan (D-Ohio), who was among the 2020 Democratic presidential candidates most focused on trade, has dropped out of the race, POLITICO reports.

— The EU’s planned offer to give the U.K. a three-month Brexit extension could be off the table after British Prime Minister Boris Johnson threatened to pull the Brexit deal if Labour leader Jeremy Corbyn rejects his demand for a general election. The Guardian has more.

— Japan and South Korea are pledging to start rebuilding their relationship amid a bitter trade feud that has gone on for months, The Straits Times reports.





Follow us on Twitter Pradnya Joshi @pjoshidc



John Yearwood @john_yearwood



Doug Palmer @tradereporter



Gavin Bade @GavinBade



Steven Overly @StevenOverly
