Indian Army Chief endangering regional peace with irresponsible statements: DG ISPR

"Indian Army Chief's only success is to turn Indian Army into a rogue force", said DG ISPR.

RAWALPINDI (Dunya News) - A statement issued by the Director General (DG) Inter-Services Public Relations (ISPR), criticizing the Indian Army Chief, said he was endangering the peace of the region with his irresponsible statements.

Responding to a statement issued by Indian Army Chief Bipin Rawat, Major General Asif Ghafoor expressed that he was making such irresponsible statements only for the electioneering of his political masters. “From the fake surgical strikes to date, his only success has been to turn the Indian Army into a rogue force and getting them killed”, he added.

Indian COAS repeatedly provoking war through irresponsible statements endangering regional peace for electioneering of political masters. From fake surgical strike todate his only success has been to turn Indian Army into a rogue force and getting them killed.(1of2). — DG ISPR (@OfficialDGISPR) October 25, 2019

DG ISPR went on to say that Bipin Rawat’s statement is coupled with the blood of innocents. “Indian forces have suffered heavy losses from the Pakistani armed forces several times”, he added.

Indian Army Chief’s statements coupled with blood of innocents on hand, losses to Indian forces at the hands of Pakistan Armed Forces, heli crashes due to so called tech fault cum fratricide just to become Indian CDS is actually at the cost of professional military ethos.(2of2). — DG ISPR (@OfficialDGISPR) October 25, 2019

On Oct. 21, Director General (DG) Inter-Services Public Relations (ISPR) Major General Asif Ghafoor has on Tuesday said that what good Indian High Commission is which can’t stand with its Army Chief.

Major General Asif Ghafoor said Indian High Commission staff did not have the moral courage to accompany fellow diplomats in Pakistan to the Line of Control (LoC). However, a group of foreign diplomats and media is on the way to LoC to see the truth on ground, he added.

What good Indian High Commission is which can’t stand with its Army Chief? Indian High Commission staff didn’t have the moral courage to accompany fellow diplomats in Pakistan to LOC. However, a group of foreign diplomats & media is on the way to LOC to see the truth on ground. — DG ISPR (@OfficialDGISPR) October 22, 2019

Let it be known that Pakistan invited the entire diplomatic corps to visit the restive LoC and inspect the areas hit by Indian shelling on Saturday night and Sunday.

According to diplomatic sources, invitations were extended to heads of missions of all embassies in Islamabad to visit Jura, Shahkot and Nousehri sectors along the LoC and observe the ground situation.

The Foreign Office had also invitated India’s Charge d’ Affaires Gaurav Ahluwalia to prove the claim of Indian army’s chief of hitting camps inside Pakistan, however, no official from the Indian High Commission arrived to visit the LoC situation.

Foreign Office Spokesperson Dr Muhammad Faisal further affirmed that India has not provided any information about locations of alleged launch pads which it had claimed of destroying inside Pakistan.

He revealed that the FO had been waiting for a response from Indian High Commission, and remained silent when it was asked to visit the LoC to verify to accusations against Pakistan.
