Ahead of Deepavali, doctors sound note of caution on crackers

Injuries caused by sparklers, bombs principal reason for eye trauma, say experts

As the city prepares to light up Deepavali with firecrackers, flower pots and sparklers, ophthalmologists are bracing for a likely spike in ocular injuries from careless handling of the fireworks.

According to experts, the eyes are the second most common affected area after the hands and fingers. Some of the common injuries are caused by sparklers and bombs along with ‘chakra’ crackers which also cause eye trauma.

Most fireworks injuries occuring during this season have a direct impact on eyes causing serious injuries. A large number of ocular injuries are reported every year, caused mainly due to firecrackers.

The ophthalmology unit at the Government Indira Gandhi Medical College and Research Institute (IGMCRI) sees a sharp increase in OPD cases of ocular trauma secondary to fireworks exposure in the run-up to and during Deepavali.

“In many instances, the victim may not be the one who handled fireworks, but may have been caught in the vicinity of a carelessly burst cracker,” says T. Vijhaya Priya, Associate Professor of Ophthalmology, IGMCRI.

Firework injury is one of the major causes of vision loss, and according to some estimates, account for 20% of the cases of ocular trauma.

Children and young adults are often victims. The heat from the crackers, the force with which particles hit the eye and the chemicals used in the firecrackers damage the eyes and may result in loss of vision.

“The spectrum of ocular injuries can range from simple foreign body in the eye to rupture of the eyeball,” said Dr. Vijhaya Priya, who refers cases of grievous ocular injuries to tertiary centres such as the Aravind Eye Hospital.

Major casualties

Apart from individuals who handle crackers, more than 50% bystanders are at high risk of sustaining eye injuries.

The other major casualties are passersby who are exposed to ignited firecrackers in the streets.

“The severity can range from mild irritation and corneal abrasions to retinal complications and open globe injury leading to potential blindness,” says Jayalatha K. - Head Clinical Services, Dr. Agarwal’s Eye Hospital. According to Dr. Jayalatha, although patients with closed eye injuries were treated on an outpatient basis, most cases with open eye injury are advised admission for further management and observation.

In the past, admitted cases included patients with corneal and scleral tears, traumatic iridodialysis with hyphema, suspected intraocular foreign body (IOFB), and globe rupture.

Ophthalmologists say that chemical injuries are due to the chemicals in the gunpowder mixed in the crackers. The constant smoke can cause irritability and watering of eyes. Fumes emanating from firecrackers may also cause laryngitis and other throat infections.

Sparklers are dangerous because they burn at a temperature hot enough to melt gold (1,800° F) — a magnitude of heat that is nearly 1,000 degrees hotter than the boiling point of water, hot enough to melt glass and cause third-degree burns to the skin.

Most fireworks contain gunpowder, which causes these devices to explode.

Pollution levels also peak during Deepavali, with nitrous oxide and sulphur dioxide levels rising considerably, as do decibel levels.

As contact lenses may cause irritation to the eyes if exposed to direct heat for a long time, doctors advise those using these to extra cautious while bursting crackers.

Noise levels

In India, the Ministry of Environment and Forests has banned the manufacture, sale, and use of firecrackers generating noise levels exceeding 125 dB. The Supreme Court has also restricted the duration of bursting crackers to two hours in a day. “However, effective legislation regarding use of firecrackers is yet to be formulated in India.

“The Central Pollution Control Board estimates that 95% of firecrackers violate noise and air pollution norms,” Dr. Vijhaya Priya pointed out.
