Bypolls a ‘wake-up call’ for NDA, takeaways for opposition too

PATNA: The results of bye-elections to five assembly seats in Bihar have come as an eye-opener for the ruling NDA and has several takeaways both for the ruling alliance as well as the opposition Mahagathbandhan ahead of next year’s assembly elections in the state.Political observers said the results are an eye-opener for NDA in the state, especially JD(U), which could win only one of the four seats it contested. The accountability factor for the Nitish Kumar-led JD (U) has become even more acute with BJP chief Amit Shah declaring recently that NDA will fight the assembly polls under Nitish’s leadership.Political observer and former Patna College principal Nawal Kishore Chaudhary feels that the bypoll results could be a “boon in disguise” for JD (U). “The bypoll results have clearly shown it is not the victory of opposition but the loss of the ruling alliance. People voted in a negative manner to express their displeasure over declining performance of the Nitish government. Thus, JD (U) as well as BJP can take it as a wake- up call to improve their performance in the state elections due next year,” Chaudhary said.The results also showed that family politics is being largely rejected by the voters. JD (U)’s Banka MP Girdhari Yadav’s brother Laldhari Yadav and Siwan MP Kavita Singh’s husband Ajay Singh lost from Belhar and Daraundha seats respectively. However, LJP’s Prince Raj, the nephew of Ramvilas Paswan, winning the Samastipur parliamentary bypoll remained an exception as has been the case with anyone from the Paswan family contesting an election.D M Diwakar, head of department of economics at A N Sinha Institute of Social Sciences, said the fact that the beleaguered RJD managed to win two seats despite lacking a driving force should “warn” the ruling NDA.“The same people voted en-block in the Lok Sabha elections but they were more meticulous about the issues related to the state and their own constituency in the bypolls. This happened despite the fact that Opposition leaders like Jitan Ram Manjhi were not united. The results should warn the NDA to make course corrections ahead of the assembly elections. People cannot be taken for granted,” Diwakar added.Another aspect of the bypoll results is that it shows national issues such as Article 370 may not work in state elections in Bihar. Besides, JD(U) is yet to assess whether BJP’s poll- agenda of implementing National Register of Citizens (NRC) is affecting their poll prospects in Muslim-dominated Seemanchal region.“The bye-election results have shown resentment among people in Bihar against the ruling NDA on ground-level issues in the state, including flooding, prolonged waterlogging and unemployment among others. The ruling alliance should also assess their poll prospects in Seemanchal areas with Muslim-dominated population in the wake of key poll issues of BJP, including NRC and Article 370 among others,” said Chaudhary.The results, especially the AIMIM victory in Kishanganj, have sparked a bout of verbal volley. Senior BJP leader Sushil Kumar Modi said on Friday that the victory of AIMIM showed shallowness of claims of RJD and Congress of having monopoly over minority voters.RJD, on the other hand, claimed that NDA will face worse results in the state elections. “Results of bypolls were just a trailer. People of Bihar have shown that they can no longer be swayed by shallow propaganda. The rejection of Nitish government is evident. People now trust in Mahagathbandhan for a better Bihar,” RJD spokesperson Mrityunjay Tiwari said.
