Odisha govt backtracks from warning against bank deposits after RBI raises flag

The Odisha government has issued a clarification after Reserve Bank of India (RBI) expressed concerns over the Naveen Patnaik-led administration's directives to its departments against making deposits with banks.

Citing media reports flagging doubts over safety of deposits in some banks, the Odisha government had earlier directed its departments, PSUs and other agencies to be 'very careful' while keeping deposits in any bank.

However, RBI expressed concerns over the Odisha government's letter on taking "precautions" while depositing money in banks. The Odisha government has now issued a clarification over the matter, saying that it does not have any views on the fiscal health of any particular bank.

"It is to be clarified that the state government does not have any view on the fiscal health of any particular bank. That comes under the domain of Reserve Bank of India. There is no reason for anyone to get apprehensive about the financial health of the banks in general," read the clarification from Odisha's Principal Secretary to all the concerned officials and departments.

The Odisha government also clarified that the earlier circular issued on October 21 was only meant to avoid opening of new accounts and shifting of government funds meant for welfare and development activities of government without any reason from one bank to another.



Earlier, Odisha's Principal Secretary, in a letter to the officials and concerned departments, stated that "precaution" has to be taken when depositing government funds in banks". The statement issued then stated that it shall be "the personal responsibility of the concerned authority for such deposits.

The letter had then asked the departments to utilise the government funds directly from treasury through Integrated Financial Management System (IFMS) instead of parking the amount in any bank account. The letter also mentioned that withdrawal of money from treasury without sufficient grounds and depositing the same in bank account shall be construed as a financial irregularity.
