Cyclone Kyarr set to intensify in next 24 hours; red alert in Karnataka

Indian Coast Guard has stepped up efforts rescuing 19 fishermen and escorting more than 2100 fishing boats to safety at various ports along the western coast | Photo Credit: Twitter

Key Highlights Cyclone Kyarr is very likely to intensify further into an extremely severe cyclonic storm during next 24 hours, warned IMD Indian Coast Guard has stepped up efforts rescuing 19 fishermen and escorting more than 2100 fishing boats to safety at various ports along the western coast

Bengaluru: The Indian Coast Guard has stepped up efforts for search and rescue operations on the Western coast in the backdrop of weatherman warning of “extremely severe cyclonic” conditions over the next 24 hours in the region due to Cyclone Karr.

The India Meteorological Department said Cyclone Kyarr “is very likely to intensify further into an extremely severe cyclonic storm during next 24 hours”.

The coast guard has so far rescued 19 fishermen and escorted more than 2100 fishing boats to safety at various ports along the western coast.

“We've stepped up efforts for search and Rescue operation on Western Coast in the wake of Cyclone Kyarr. Dornier aircraft is undertaking frequent sortie to look for stranded fishing boats and their positions are being relayed to Coast Guard Ships operating at sea,” an official from the Indian Coast Guard said.

Severe Cyclonic Storm ‘KYARR’ over eastcentral Arabian Sea moved northwards and lay centred at 2030 hrs IST of today, the 25th October, 2019 near latitude 16.3°N and longitude 71.7°E over eastcentral Arabian Sea, about 190 km nearly to the west of Ratnagiri (Maharashtra)., pic.twitter.com/LAk45dWs0v — IMD Weather (@IMDWeather) October 25, 2019

The IMD warned that the sea condition is “very likely to be high to very high” over east-central Arabian Sea during the next 24 hours and phenomenal thereafter. It will be rough to very rough along and off north Karnataka coast during next 24 hours.

The cyclonic storm Kyarr is set to blunt the festivities in Karnataka as the weather office has predicted heavy rains and gusty winds.

"The westward moving cyclonic storm Kyarr will hit the state on Sunday with heavy rains and thunder showers in the coastal and south interior areas, disrupting normal life for the next two days," Karnataka state natural disaster monitoring centre director G.S. Srinivas Reddy told the news agency IANS, here on Saturday.

Karnataka has issued a red alert in the coastal districts of Dakshina Kannada, Udupi and Uttara Kannada and shut down schools and colleges on Saturday as moderate to heavy rain lashed the region.
