After BJP distances itself from Gopal Kanda, Subramanian Swamy dares Congress to drop Shashi Tharoor

Shashi Tharoor

Key Highlights Union minister Ravi Shankar Prasad issued a clarification saying that the BJP will not take the support of Gopal Kanda Uma Bharti had also cautioned the party of taking Kanda's support to form the government in Haryana The BJP faced heavy criticism from all corners for taking support of Kanda

New Delhi: After the BJP refused to take support from Haryana Lokhit Party leader Gopal Kanda to form the government in Haryana, Rajya Sabha MP Subramanian Swamy has now challenged the Congress to drop its MP Shashi Tharoor “for a more serious offence of abetting his wife’s unnatural death.”

Taking to his Twitter account Swamy said, “Now that BJP has bowed to public opinion by rejecting Gopal Kanda, will Congi also bow to public opinion by expelling from the party Mr. Shashi Tharoor for a more serious offence of abetting his wife’s unnatural death?”

Swamy’s statement comes after Congress spokesperson Manish Tewari took a dig at the BJP saying that the saffron party will take support from anyone to form the government in the state even when the mandate is against them.

“Kanda, Batata, Baingan, Aloo -Sab Chalega BJP Ko - Sam Dam, Dand, Bhed- Sarkar Banani Hai BJP Ko - by all means foul - even when the mandate is against them. Party with a difference eh!” he had tweeted.

Yesterday, Union minister Ravi Shankar Prasad issued a clarification saying that the BJP will not take the support of Gopal Kanda, a controversial politician who faces two abetment-to-suicide cases, to form the government in Haryana.

“I want to clarify one thing that the BJP is not going to take the support of Kanda,” Prasad told reporters.

After the results for Haryana elections were declared, Kanda decided to extend his unconditional support to the Bharatiya Janata Party (BJP). The BJP came under heavy criticism for taking support of the tainted legislature with Congress spokesperson Randeep Surjewala accusing the saffron party of doublespeak.

Former Union minister and senior BJP leader Uma Bharti had also cautioned the party of taking Kanda's support to form the government in Haryana saying it could hurt the clean image of PM Narendra Modi and Manohar Lal Khattar.

All India Mahila Congress president Sushmita Dev also wrote to Home Minister Amit Shah reminding him that it was Kanda whose name was written on the suicide note of Airline worker Geetika Sharma.

The BJP emerged as the single-largest party in the recently concluded Haryana Assembly elections with 40 seats while the Congress won 31 seats. Dushyant Chautala's Jannayak Janata Party (JJP) which has 10 MLAs and the Indian National Lok Dal (INLD) with one MLA decided to extend support to the BJP in the state.
