‘Strong’ Shivakumar to fight for justice

Bengaluru: Senior Congress leader DK Shivakumar, who returned to the city on Saturday after his release on bail from a Delhi prison in a money laundering case, said he was “confident”, “strong” and would fight for justice.

The former Minister also claimed that he has not betrayed anyone at any point of time and would come out with facts and documents regarding the case in the days to come.

“If my brother, myself and my family members had gone against the law, I’m ready to accept any punishment… If I have done wrong let them hang me… but I won’t remain silent,” Shivakumar said.

Speaking to reporters, he said, “I won’t go against my conscience.. I don’t want to trouble or cheat anyone. I don’t need such life. I come from a village.”

“There’s no question of going back. I will fight. Time and law will give answers. I’m personally confident,” he said adding he and his will power has grown stronger.

“I will fight for justice,” he added.

Hundreds of Congress workers and supporters of Shivakumar gave him a grand welcome as he landed at the city airport in the afternoon.

The 57-year-old Vokkaliga strong man, who has his own support base in parts of old Mysuru region of Bengaluru Rural, Ramanagara, Mandya and neighboring areas was greeted by supporters with flowers, crackers and a mammoth apple garland upon his arrival.

Shivakumar was brought to KPCC office here from the airport in a procession, as he waved and acknowledged supporters from an open car, leading to traffic chaos, to which he apologised later.

Addressing a packed conference hall at KPCC office, Shivakumar flanked by senior Congress leaders including state president Dinesh Gundu Rao, working President Eshwar Khandre, said, “I’ve now come to my temple, the party office.”

Asserting that he has done nothing wrong and all his assets, businesses and that of his family have been declared in his election affidavit, he said, “I have brought everything before the people of the state and country.”

“It’s being talked about and investigated… In the coming days, will come out with facts and documents. Everything is in the public domain.. I’m agriculturist by birth, business man by profession, educationist by choice and politician by passion,” he added. (PTI)
