Super cyclonic storm Kyarr over Arabian Sea: Weather warnings for Kerala districts

Super cyclonic storm Kyarr over Arabian Sea: Weather warnings for Kerala districts

IMD and Kerala State Disaster Management Authority have put out strict warnings for fishermen, prohibiting them from venturing into the sea.

news Weather

A super cyclonic storm over east central Arabian Sea has put Kerala on alert again. The storm named ‘Kyarr’ is expected to turn into an extremely severe cyclonic storm on Tuesday. The Indian Meteorological Department (IMD) has issued weather warnings for various Kerala districts.

Orange colour code warning, implying authorities to be prepared, has been issued in Kollam district for Tuesday and in Idukki for Wednesday. Isolated heavy to very heavy rainfall ranging up to 204.4mm has been predicted in the two districts.

Meanwhile, yellow colour code warning, meaning to keep updated, has been issued for Thiruvananthapuram, Kollam, Pathanamthitta and Idukki on Monday; Thiruvananthapuram, Pathanamthitta, Alappuzha, Kottayam, Ernakulam and Idukki on Tuesday. On Wednesday, the yellow colour code warnings have been declared similar to Tuesday, with the additional warnings given to Thrissur and Palakkad.

“Kyarr is very likely to move west-northwestwards towards Oman coast during next 5 days. It is very likely to maintain the intensity of a Super Cyclonic Storm till Monday and weaken gradually thereafter,” states a weather warning report of IMD. Kyarr which will remain as a super cyclonic storm on Monday will turn into a extremely severe cyclonic storm on Tuesday. The storm has been predicted to lose its strength after Tuesday and turn into a very severe cyclonic storm on Wednesday. By Thursday, it will further lose intensity and become a severe cyclonic storm.

IMD and Kerala State Disaster Management Authority have put out strict warnings for fishermen prohibiting them from venturing into the sea. “The fishermen are advised not to venture into east central Arabian Sea till Tuesday and into west central Arabian Sea from Monday to Friday,” states IMD. High swell waves in the range of 2.5 - 2.9 meters are forecasted till Tuesday midnight beyond 10 km off the coast of Kerala.

Read:

Kerala sees 13 acid attacks in 2017, ranks 4th in India
