PM Modi in Jammu & Kashmir: 'With surgical strike, India has declared its new policy to tackle terror'

PM Modi in Jammu & Kashmir: 'With surgical strike, India has declared its new policy to tackle terror'

PM Narendra Modi said every terrorist will be dealt with in a befitting manner.

India has shown the world its new policy (neeti) and tradition (reeti) in tackling terrorism with the surgical strike across the Line of Control, Prime Minister Narendra Modi said Sunday.

Addressing a function in Srinagar, PM Modi said every terrorist will be dealt with in a befitting manner and asserted that the government will break the backbone of terror in the valley "I assure all the youths of Jammu and Kashmir and the country that the government will give befitting response ('muhtod jawab') to every terrorist. We will break the backbone of terror in the state," he said.

Paying homage to those killed while fighting terrorists, including Nazir Ahmed Wani and Aurangzeb from Jammu and Kashmir, Modi said heroes are those who live to fulfil dreams and the biggest cowards are the ones who kill others' dreams.

"Today the whole country is angry to see the killings of innocent and armless Kashmiri youths. (These Kashmiri boys are targeted) because these youths want to live and fulfil their dreams.

"But they are targeted by terrorism. This is the truth of terrorism here," he said, adding the Indian government will fight terrorism with all its might.

The prime minister said the development of people of Jammu and Kashmir and that of the state is the priority of the central government.

Modi assured all that his government will follow the late Prime Minister Atal Bihari Vajpayee's dream of peaceful and prosperous Kashmir with the motto of "sabka saath, sabka vikaas" (collective efforts, inclusive growth).

"We will keep making all the efforts (in realising this dream)," the prime minister said.

Modi also addressed public meetings in Leh and Vijaypur in Jammu, after inaugurating several development projects in Jammu and Kashmir.

(If you can't see the full gallery click here)
