Grand alliance leaders pitch for Rahul Gandhi as the next PM

PATNA: Grand Alliance leaders present in the rally extended their support to Congress national president Rahul Gandhi (RaGa) for becoming the next Prime Minister.Leader of opposition in the state assembly, Tejashwi Yadav said, “Rahul Gandhi has all the qualities needed in a PM. Congress is the biggest party and we expect you to give accommodation to all the allies while leading.”Calling Prime Minister Narendra Modi as the factory and wholesaler of lies and RSS as the retailer, Tejashwi said they know how to sell jumla. He mocked at Modi saying in 2014 the then PM candidate was even selling combs to bald assuring he would get their hair to grow after some time. “Has Rs 15 lakh come in everyone’s account? Did two crore youth get the job promised to them”.Pointing at his father and RJD chief Lalu Prasad, he said those raising voice against the present government were threatened by CBI and ED. “But my father is a lion and you cannot remove him from the hearts of common people”, added Tejashwi.Loktantrik Janta Dal leader Sharad Yadav said the country was passing through a very difficult phase and Constitution and democracy was in danger. “This is an undeclared emergency which is not visible. Lynching is taking place. They are dividing the country on Mandir and Masjid issue. Even northeast is boiling”, said Sharad asking people to use their ballot paper strength in order to out the NDA government. He even hit at the Nitish Kumar for switching sides with the NDA and cheating with the mandate of the people.CPI leader Satya Narayan Singh appreciated Congress for organizing the rally saying it had given life to the party. He expressed grief over the incident in which Hindu Mahasabha leader Puja Shakun Pandey recreated Mahatma Gandhi’s assassination by shooting at Gandhi’s effigy using an artificial gun on Gandhi’s death anniversary.Hindustani Awam Morcha (Secular) leader Jitan Ram Manjhi rapped the NDA government for mistreating ‘dalits’ of the country. “I want people not to let NDA come back and my desire is to see Rahul Gandhi as the next PM”. GA leaders also criticized the state government for using muscle power on RLSP leader Upendra Kushwaha , who was in Patna Medical College and Hospital, and his party workers a day before the rally.Rahul thanked all the GA leaders sitting on the dais. He even called Tejashwi as a young leader who was working for the people and not lying The Congress president even answered Tejashwi’s concern saying, “We will together fight the general elections and assembly elections”.
