Intelligence agencies warn of possible attack in Kashmir by Pakistan-backed terror groups

Kashmir (file photo) | Photo Credit: PTI

Key Highlights Awantipora, Srinagar or Rangreth airfields in the Kashmir Valley are among targets Terror organisations have also resorted to using posters to threaten local businessmen against not abiding by calls of a shutdown

New Delhi: Intelligence agencies have warned of possible terror attacks in Jammu and Kashmir by Pakistan-based terror groups. Citing intelligence inputs, news agencies reported that these groups could target government and security establishments in Kashmir to create a 'prolonged hostage like situation' in the Valley.

According to official sources, terrorists belonging to Jaish-e-Mohammed, Lashkar-e-Taiba and the Hizbul Mujahideen may target areas of Zonakar, Rainawari, Safakadal and Dharamshala in Srinagar district in the days to come.

According to a report by news agency PTI, intelligence inputs have also hinted towards a likelihood of grenade attacks on security forces to create fear psychosis and to threaten civilian authorities across the Valley.

Meanwhile, terrorist organisations have been using posters to disseminate threat messages to scare local businessmen, shopkeepers against not responding to calls of shutdown in the Valley. Hizbul Mujahideen has warned truck owners, fruit vendors, government officials and fruit traders of dire consequences if the call for a shutdown is not abided by.

According to intelligence inputs, Awantipora, Srinagar or Rangreth airfields in the Kashmir Valley are likely to be targetted by the terror organisations. Security agencies have been put on high alert ahead of the bifurcation of Jammu and Kashmir into two union territories. On October 31, the state will be divided into two UTs — Jammu and Kashmir, with a legislative Assembly and Ladakh, without one.

On August 5, the government abrogated Article 370 and revoked the special status of Jammu and Kashmir, following which security in the state has been beefed up.
