Mumbai: 3 bridges, 2 foot over bridges to be razed, rebuilt in western suburbs

The demolition and reconstruction will take two years and cost the civic body Rs 27.06 crore.

The Brihanmumbai Municipal Corporation (BMC) plans to demolish and rebuild at least five bridges in the western suburbs. Three bridges and two foot over bridges (FOBs) — located in Goregaon, Malad and Kandivali — will be demolished and rebuilt, according to the bridges department.

The demolition and reconstruction will take two years and cost the civic body Rs 27.06 crore. “The five bridges were found extremely dilapidated in a recent structural audit. Following this, we had floated tenders for their demolition and reconstruction. After the contractor is appointed, the work will be finished in 24 months. If everything goes as per plan, work could start in the next couple of months,” said an official from the bridges department.

The three bridges include the bridge across Ramchandra nalla on S V Road in Malad West, bridge across Walbhat nalla in Goregaon East and bridge on SVP Road in Kandivali West. The two FOBs are at Sarojini Nagar in Kandivali West and at Akurli Road in Kandivali East.

In March, the 27-year-old CSMT FOB, officially known as Himalaya Bridge, connecting the iconic station, had collapsed killing six people and leaving 31 injured. BMC officials were under fire as the collapsed bridge had been declared fit for use by the structural auditor appointed by the civic body.

After the FOB collapsed, the civic body had ordered a structural audit of about 300 bridges. The audit found 29 bridges to be “extremely dangerous” requiring immediate demolition. Meanwhile, there are challenges for the BMC, which will carry out the task as there are some structures in the way of the work, officials said.

“During the pre-bid meeting, some contractors raised the issue of obstructions. There is a public toilet in the way of the alignment of the proposed bridge at Walbhat nalla and seven shops need to be demolished at Ramchandra nalla. We have informed the respective wards to clear these structures so that work can be expedited,” an official told The Indian Express.

The demolition and reconstruction of dilapidated bridges was also delayed after the civic body failed to get a response from contractors. In July, the BMC had floated tenders for 10 dilapidated bridges but by September it found contractors only for seven.

Just before the model code of conduct came into effect before the Assembly polls on October 21, the proposal for demolition and reconstruction of seven dilapidated bridges worth Rs 58.26 crore was passed. The bridges included those at Hans Bhugara Marg in Santacruz, Juhu Tara Bridge in Juhu, Dhobighat Majas bridge at Jogeshwari and Link Road Malad near D-Mart.
