Why allow foreign delegation in Kashmir: BJP's bitter ally Sena targets govt over EU panel visit

Amid bickering over sharing of power in the next Maharashtra government, the Shiv Sena has hit out at the BJP government in Centre over the Kashmir visit of a delegation of parliamentarians from the European Union.

Taking a dig at the Narendra Modi-led government, the Shiv Sena in its mouthpiece Saamna raised questions over the visit of a delegation of 23 EU MPs to Valley as it reiterated that Kashmir is an internal matter of India.

"The 28-member European delegation is in Kashmir to check conditions. Kashmir is [an] internal matter of our country. The national flag was hoisted in Kashmir and therefore we are proud of Narendra Modi and Amit Shah. But if everything is fine in Kashmir, why was an outside delegation sent to Kashmir. Isn't it [Kashmir] our internal matter?" the Sena asked.

"You [government] do not want the UN to interfere but you are sending a delegation to Kashmir. Foreign people coming and visiting Kashmir is [an] attack on the freedom and raises serious questions," it said in its editorial in Saamna.

The Saamna editorial said the Home Minister should also answer how a foreign delegation was allowed to visit Kashmir while denying permission to Indian parliamentarians. "We just want that the delegation visiting Kashmir does not have any repercussions," it added.

The Shiv Sena also claimed that the EU delegation's visit to Kashmir has given an opportunity to the Opposition to raise questions.

The editorial on EU delegation's Kashmir visit came a day after Devendra Fadnavis said he was unhappy with the way the BJP government is targetted by the Shiv Sena in its editorial. Devendra Fadnavis had made the remark while speaking to media on Tuesday.

The 23 EU MPs were the first high-level foreign visitors to Kashmir after the August 5 decision of the Centre to revoke Jammu and Kashmir's special status under Article 370 and divide the state into the union territories of Jammu and Kashmir, and Ladakh.

Also read | Nobody stopped Congress leaders from visiting Kashmir after situation normalised: BJP spokesperson

Also watch | EU MPs' Kashmir visit a PR stunt or diplomatic offensive?
