N Uttam Kumar Reddy escapes Congress ire

Hyderabad: Telangana Pradesh Congress Committee (TPCC) president N. Uttam Kumar Reddy put a full stop to discussion on the Congress debacle in the Huzurnagar byelection by taking responsibility for it.

A TPCC core committee meeting was held on Tuesday at Gandhi Bhavan followed by an extended executive committee meeting to discuss the agitation programmes against the central government as directed by the party’s central leadership.

The core committee meeting was attended by All India Congress Committee general secretary and Telangana Congress affairs in-charge R.C. Khuntia, TPCC working presidents and former MP V. Hanumantha Rao.

At the beginning, Mr Uttam Kumar Reddy said, “I am taking responsibility as TPCC president for the defeat of Congress in the Huzurnagar byelection.”

Mr Hanumantha Rao said, "when the TPCC president said he is taking responsibility for the defeat, there is no need of further discussion on this.”

Mr Rao indirectly criticised TPCC working president and MP A. Revanth Reddy when he said that some leaders who had joined the Congress had announced programmes on their own without discussing with the TPCC president and other senior party leaders. “We are original Congress leaders. we will continue in the party till our last breath. We will not change parties. If long-time Congresss leaders get hurt, they will not keep quiet.”

To this, Mr Khuntia said, “I will set things right and see that such things don’t happen again.”

Meanwhile, in the TPCC extended executive committee meeting, AICC spokesperson Prof. Gourav Vallabh gave a power point presentation on the national economy which is in danger.

Mr Uttam Kumar Reddy said that the material prepared by AICC spokesperson Sravan Dasoju and party leaders Hariprasad and Javed will be sent to all District Congress Committee presidents and Pradesh Congress Committee members. He said on November 6, in all district headquarters, Congress leaders must address media conferences on the national economy and on November 8 dharnas will be held before district collectorates and memorandums submitted to the collectors.

Mr Uttam Reddy said on November 15, there will be a padayatra from Gandhi Bhavan to the Hyderabad collectorate. The TPCC will support the Sakala Janula Samara Bheri to be conducted on Wednesday in support of the Road Transport Corporation strike, he added.

Demand for land

Mr Uttam Kumar Reddy demanded that the state government allot land in Hyderabad city for the construction of a Congress office. He said in the districts also land should be allotted to the Congress as it has been allotted to the TRS.
