UN Human Rights Chief: Impact of Removal of Some Restrictions Still to Be Felt in Kashmir

New Delhi: United Nations Human Rights commissioner Michelle Bachelet Jeria urged India to “unlock” Kashmir, noting that most senior politicians remain detained and the impact of lifting of some restrictions are still to be widely felt.

Last month, Bachelet had expressed concerns about restrictions imposed on Kashmir in her inaugural speech at the 42nd session of the UN Human Rights Council in Geneva.

After Article 370 of the constitution was read down in August, five UN-appointed independent human rights experts had described the communication clampdown and security restrictions as a “collective punishment” for the population.

Earlier, the UN Human Rights office had published two reports on alleged human violations by Indian security forces in June 2018 and July 2019, which were dismissed by the Centre.

Also read: MEP Dropped From Visit Says it Is ‘Affront to Democracy’ that Indian MPs Are Barred from Kashmir

On Tuesday, spokesperson for the High Commissioner for Human Rights, Rupert Colville said, “We are extremely concerned that the population of Indian-Administered Kashmir continues to be deprived of a wide range of human rights and we urge the Indian authorities to unlock the situation and fully restore the rights that are currently being denied”.

He noted some of the restrictive measures “have been relaxed”, but added that their “impact on human rights continues to be widely felt”.

“The undeclared curfew imposed by the authorities in the region was lifted from much of Jammu and Ladakh region within a few days, but is reportedly still in place in large parts of the Kashmir Valley, preventing the free movement of people, as well as hampering their ability to exercise their right to peaceful assembly, and restricting their rights to health, education and freedom of religion and belief,” said the Office of the United Nations High Commissioner for Human Rights spokesperson.

Further, the UN human rights chief noted that there were several allegations of excessive use of force “pellet-firing shotguns, tear gas and rubber bullets by security forces during sporadic protests, with unconfirmed reports of at least six civilian killings and scores of serious injuries in separate incidents since 5 August.”

There was also a reference to terror groups threatening residents from carrying out normal businesses and attending school. “At least another six people have been killed and over a dozen injured in alleged attacks by armed group members since 5 August,” said Colville.

The UN official noted that while some political workers have been released, most senior leaders, including three former chief ministers of Jammu and Kashmir, remain in detention.

“We have also received a number of allegations of torture and ill-treatment of people held in detention. These must be independently and impartially investigated. Torture is totally and unequivocally prohibited under international law,” he stated.

With leaders detained, their capacity to be informed has been badly restricted and right to freedom of expression and political participation has been undermined, he further observed. “Meanwhile, major political decisions about the future status of Jammu and Kashmir have been taken without the consent, deliberation or active and informed participation of the affected population”.

On the lifting of communication services, the OHCHR spokesperson stated that while restrictions on landlines have been removed and mobile services partially restored, all internet services remain blocked. The UN official stated that media organisations continue to face difficulties, with unconfirmed reports of at least four local journalists.

He also criticised the Supreme Court for being “slow to deal with petitions concerning habeas corpus, freedom of movement and media restrictions”.

“The Jammu and Kashmir State Human Rights Commission, the State Information Commission (which implements the right-to-information laws) and the State Commission for Protection of Women and Child Rights are among key institutions being wound up, with the new bodies to replace them yet to be established,” he said.
