High Court cautions Delhi govt over Farishte scheme misuse

The bench observed that the scheme can be misused through touts.

The Delhi High Court Wednesday pulled up administration of hospitals managed by the Delhi government, their staff and doctors for not giving a “damn” about their job, and observed “the attitude must go out.”

The court was hearing a PIL by a school teacher from Karawal Nagar who, through advocate Prashant Manchanda, highlighted the “crumbling infrastructure and lack of medical facilities” in Delhi government hospitals, based on an inspection carried out at 35 institutions.

“These are government hospitals, for which they have worked hard to get this job. Later they do not give a damn,” a bench of Justice G S Sistani and Justice Anup Jairam Bhambhani said, adding that “if they (doctors and other staff) do not fall in line, conduct an enquiry, throw them out”.

“Because of this attitude, patients and their family members have to suffer. Often it is seen that the people concerned are not on their seat and the patient needs to wait,” the bench observed.

It also cautioned the Delhi government over the misuse of its scheme, Farishte Dilli Ke, a new initiative aimed at felicitating citizens who take accident victims to hospitals, and said, “where you are giving facilities, you should ensure that it is not misused”. The court said if 10 people are benefiting from the scheme, there are over 40 who may misuse it.

The bench observed that the scheme can be misused through touts. “The common citizen will not be able to avail the scheme. The Delhi government needs to take strict action against such misuse,” it said, adding that the Delhi government’s intention is good, but it should not be that if a person falls in bathroom, he is admitted to a hospital as a road accident victim. It said the poor easily fall prey to touts, who promise they will take care of everything as long as a person gives his consent.

The Delhi government’s additional standing counsel, Sanjoy Ghose, submitted that he will take up the issue with the higher authority to ensure “no such schemes are being misused and the government takes a serious view on such misuse”.

The bench added that in government hospitals, “there is no culture of punctuality” and the administration needs to put their house in order. “Attendance should be made mandatory for staff to ensure they are on their seat,” the bench said, adding that hospitals should maintain hygiene and keep their equipment functional.

It also directed that the hospital staff be trained to sensitise them about dealing with patients and their families.
