Situation may turn ‘volatile’ if citizenship Bill is passed: Mahanta

Bill violates provisions of the Assam Accord, says former Chief Minister

Former Assam Chief Minister Prafulla Kumar Mahanta on Sunday warned the Narendra Modi government that a “volatile” situation will arise in the State if the contentious Citizenship (Amendment) Bill, 2016, is passed by the Rajya Sabha.

The two-time Chief Minister and founder president of the Asom Gana Parishad said the State was witnessing a mass uprising, similar to the Assam agitation of 1979-85, against the Bill and the situation may worsen if the NDA government “does not respect” people’s sentiment.

“The situation in Assam will be very volatile if the Citizenship (Amendment) Bill, 2016, is passed by the Rajya Sabha. The Modi government will be responsible for it,” Mr. Mahanta, who is in the Capital to campaign against the Bill, said.

The Bill provides Indian nationality to persecuted non-Muslims of Pakistan, Bangladesh and Afghanistan.

Mr. Mahanta said the Bill violates the provisions of the Assam Accord and basic tenets of the Constitution as it wants to give citizenship on the basis of religion to anyone who had come to India till December 31, 2014.

‘Violates SC verdict’

“When the Assam Accord was signed (1985), all political parties, including the BJP, had welcomed it. But the BJP-led government wants to ruin it now,” he said.

Mr. Mahanta said the Bill also violates the Supreme Court verdict on the famous Keshavanand Bharti case, which made it clear that basic structure of the Constitution is inviolable and hence can’t be amended by Parliament.

Political parties, students groups and others have been protesting on the grounds that the Bill seeks to grant nationality to non-Muslims who have come to India up to December 31, 2014, thereby, increasing the deadline from 1971 as per the Assam Accord. According to the Accord, all illegal immigrants who have come after 1971, irrespective of their religion, have to be deported and this Bill violates that.

An AGP delegation, including Mr. Mahanta, met a number of BJP and Opposition leaders in the last two days to impress upon them the strong sentiment of the people in Assam. They also met Union Home Minister Rajnath Singh and Congress leader Ghulam Nabi Azad.

The AGP has already quit its alliance with the BJP in the State protesting against the Modi government’s decision on the Bill.

Mr. Mahanta alleged that the BJP was completely ignoring the sentiment of the Assamese people. “It talks about something but does something else,” he said. He claimed that there were intelligence reports about the current unrest in the Northeast and that the Central government was aware about them. “If the government goes ahead with the Bill, the situation will be very difficult,” he said.
