Rain to delay onset of winter in Maharashtra

Light to moderate rainfall accompanied by thunderstorm will be experienced over all three sub-divisions — Konkan, Madhya Maharashtra and Marathwada — during October 31-November 2. (Express)

The onset of winter is expected to be delayed over Maharashtra this year with the India Meteorological Department (IMD) forecasting light rainfall during November first week.

Last week, Cyclone Kyarr caused widespread rainfall over south Konkan and Goa. IMD officials on Wednesday said that yet another depression had formed in the Arabian Sea, which is likely to bring more rain in the coming days.

“A depression lay at about 200 km from the Lakshadweep islands and is set to intensify into a deep depression and a cyclonic storm in the next 72 hours. Under its influence, there would be heavy to very heavy rain over the southern peninsular regions of Tamil Nadu, Kerala, coastal Karnataka and Rayalaseema. Similarly, some effect of this system may be experienced even over Konkan and Madhya Maharashtra during the October 31-November 2 period,” said Anupam Kashyapi, head, Weather department, IMD, Pune.

Light to moderate rainfall accompanied by thunderstorm will be experienced over all three sub-divisions — Konkan, Madhya Maharashtra and Marathwada — during October 31-November 2. Pune too is set to experience cloudy skies till November 2.

Though the system is likely to move away from India’s west coast, southern states have been placed under red alert during the next three days. “While rainfall will cease after November 4 over most regions in the state, southern Konkan and Madhya Maharashtra may continue to receive some spells till November 8. This may lead to a delay in temperatures to fall and winter to set in,” Kashyapi said.

Mercury levels in check

This year, the typical October heat was nearly absent from over most parts of Maharashtra owing to overcast skies and light rain that kept the mercury levels in check. “The day temperatures recorded remained mostly below normal than what is recorded in October. This was mainly due to the delayed monsoon withdrawal and Cyclone Kyarr…,” said Kashyapi.
