35 years of India without Indira

In the most ethnically diverse countries in the world, finding a leader who resonates with the masses is rare. And forgetting the tallest of them is even rarer.

On 31 October 1984, the first woman Prime Minister of India, riddled with 30 bullets, succumbed to her injuries. Thirty-five years have passed since India lost Indira Gandhi. The loss is as new as ever. Her demise not only changed her party – the Indian National Congress, but it also changed Indian political discourse and the entire nation, for she was the most powerful leader of India. Her assassination is one dark chapter in India’s history. And will remain so forever.

I was five-year-old when she was assassinated. Although, I may not have the memories of watching Indira Gandhi’s speeches on television but I do remember the day she was assassinated. My family had gone into mourning and being a Punjabi Hindu, we had and have deep regards and gratitude for the lady who gave up her life to save Hindus and Punjab. I can still clearly recollect how India looked right after we lost Indian politics’ first supremo. And over the years, I have carefully studied the impact of her untimely death on Congress and India.

This piece is my tribute to the Iron Lady and my honest attempt to draw the picture of India as well as Congress without its tallest leader.

Born to be fearless

One of the criticisms levelled at Indira Gandhi is that she was responsible for causing mayhem in Punjab and, eventually, losing her life.

That, however, brings us to the fact that she made the boldest decision in Indian history – a decision that no other leader would have dared to make, not even Narendra Modi. She sent the Army inside the Holy Shrine of Sikhs- the Golden Temple. The Sikh community saw Operation Blue Star as an attack on their religion and this was difficult for them to live with. They sought revenge.

But had she not taken that step, Punjab would have become Khalistan as Bhindrawale and his militant brigade were mercilessly killing Hindus and were desecrating Hindu temples in Punjab. There was complete bloodshed in Punjab. We owe it to the Iron Lady for taking such a bold step to save India’s integrity and sovereignty which no leader in her place would have dared to do that.

On 31 October 1984, Indira Gandhi was assassinated by her two Sikh bodyguards.

Despite receiving Intel inputs about the repeated threats to her life from the Sikhs, she didn’t shift her Sikh bodyguards.

She was shot dead by the same bodyguards.

There’s no denying that she paid the price of being a nationalist and secular leader. But being the epitome of secularism that she was, she didn’t want to create a communal divide by removing the Sikh bodyguards from her security.

A compassionate yet highly courageous leader who feared none. Not even death. That was Indira Gandhi.

A political vacuum nobody could step into

When legions of Modi fans hail him for his authoritarianism, decisiveness, and for being a high command leader, they forget that he is following in Indira Gandhi’s footsteps. After all, Indira had all these traits and many more. In fact, she was the one who actually strengthened the Indian Army and started nuclear tests – all that has become Narendra Modi’s pièce de résistance today.

The world knows that ‘Nationalism’ was the ‘Brahmastra’ of Indira Gandhi. While she knew how to dominate her party, she also knew how to be a real populist. This was the reason why she was loved by all. And her party was no different.

But, after her demise, everything changed overnight.

Her son, Rajiv Gandhi, became the Prime Minister soon after her death. While Indira was a leader who was connected to the people at the grassroots level, Rajiv was naïve in politics. In the days since he was sworn in as India’s PM, he tried to take Indira’s legacy forward. But he had big shoes to fill. Doing justice to such a great statesman who untiringly fought for the nation’s integrity and unity was arguably the toughest job for any successor.

Rajiv faced another enormous challenge: to prevent the nation from tearing itself apart, in the wake of anti-Sikh riots, which followed right after Indira Gandhi’s assassination.

During his tenure, the trials were many. Violence was showing its ugly face, and not only in Punjab. From 1984 to 1989, Rajiv had to deal with simmering fires in Assam, Mizoram, and Sri Lanka as well.

More importantly, the first five years is too short a time to understand the politics and dynamics of a party like Congress and a country like India. By the time, Rajiv would have grasped it all, he was assassinated. Leaving the Congress party in the doldrums.

Then Ram Janambhoomi movement steered by L. K. Advani resulted in the rise of the right-wing and the Hindutva-based BJP. The Congress party’s political fortunes dipped further south as it drifted from Hinduism, patriotism, and even nationalism, and increasingly leaned to the Left. After Indira, India started turning ‘Right’, and Congress started turning ‘Left’.

Indira’s Congress was just like an umbrella that had a place for every kind of voice – left, right, and centre. Although her economic policies were left-leaning and pro-poor with a focus on poverty alleviation (Garibi Hatao) and nationalisation, her politics were right-leaning. Her flexibility in ideology was impeccable. Perhaps, that was the reason why many times the RSS came out in her support as well.

While the Congress during Indira’s time knew how to employ the Left intellectuals and their ideas for her politics, the Congress today seems to be employed by the Leftists. The difference is stark.

Today’s Congress is hijacked by the communists and leftists who are like parasites destroying the once upon a time, India’s first nationalist party- Indian National Congress. Congress’s supreme leadership finds solace only in communists and is surrounded by ultra-leftists- whom Indira Gandhi kept at bay, as she knew that they were the parasites and are deadly dangerous for both, India and the Congress Party.

This shift in ideology and the failure to take everyone along resulted in Congress’ debacle in the Hindi heartland. The party lost power in Uttar Pradesh in 1989 and Bihar in 1990 and couldn’t reclaim it. Note that the party had already lost Sikkim in 1984 and failed to make a comeback in the Land of Flower as well.

Fast-forward to the present. The Congress party has governments only in Punjab, Madhya Pradesh, Rajasthan, Chhattisgarh, and Puducherry. The BJP, on the other hand, has its governments in 16 states.

After Indira, Congress declined year by year and failed to recuperate. The communities and the states that left the party never came back.

At some point, Congress conceded political space to regional satraps. As a result, in Uttar Pradesh, Mulayam Singh Yadav and Mayawati rose to prominence, and in Bihar, Lalu Prasad Yadav became popular.

On the national front too, the party faced a steep decline. In 1998, Mamata Banerjee quit the Congress party and founded the All India Trinamool Congress (AITC or TMC). And in 1999, Sonia Gandhi entered party politics, but the masses failed to accept her due to her foreign origin. Meanwhile, Sharad Pawar left the Congress too and founded the Nationalist Congress Party in Maharashtra.

Even though, after the 1984 General election, the leadership baton was passed to Rajiv Gandhi with a thumping victory with 414 seats, it was due to the immense sympathy wave after Indira Gandhi’s assassination. Since then, Congress never got a massive mandate and descended towards the era of coalitions, marking the growing popular discontent.

In 1991, P.V. Narasimha Rao headed a minority government with the help of left parties.

In 1996, India witnessed a roller-coaster ride with the formation of two governments in merely two weeks. After Atal Bihari Vajpayee’s coalition led by the BJP ended in just 13 days, H. D. Devegowda became the prime minister with Congress’ support. This government fell within ten months, catapulting I. K. Gujral to become the 12th Prime Minister of India.

In 1998, Congress left the I.K. Gujral government, and new elections were called. Consequently, the BJP’s Atal Bihari Vajpayee again became the Prime Minister after getting support from 286 members out of 545 in 1998. But this government also collapsed on 17 April 1999.

This political instability finally ended with the 1999 Indian general election, which led to a stable majority of the BJP-led NDA, making Atal Bihari Vajpayee India’s Prime Minister for the third time.

Although Sonia Gandhi somehow brought Congress to power in 2004, forming the Manmohan Singh government, the INC failed to get a majority. While the BJP was making inroads into the Congress citadel, the latter was eroding.

Indira Gandhi – A paragon of unity Congress failed to learn from

This erosion can be imputed to the many fiascos that the Congress party did over the past three decades. One such fizzer was carving the state of Telangana out of Andhra Pradesh. The united Andhra Pradesh has always stood by the Congress. Remember how this state sent a good number of MPs to power the United Progressive Alliance (UPA) form its governments. Alas, the situation is not the same anymore!

Had Indira Gandhi been alive, she would have never done what the Congress government did under Sonia Gandhi’s leadership in 2014 by creating Telangana. The party now continues to pay for this division of the Telugu-speaking State.

But the list of blunders done by the Congress after Indira Gandhi’s assassination doesn’t end there.

Note that when Indira was there, every section of the country associated with her. People irrespective of their caste, creed, religion, region, and gender connected with the Congress party. Hindu majority and minorities all equally supported her – for she was a darling of Hindus – so much so that she shared a warm relationship with Balasaheb Thackery (a right-wing pro-Marathi and the founder of Shiv Sena). He even supported Indira Gandhi during the emergency.

Recently, when Congress attacked BJP for seeking Bharat Ratna for Vinayak Damodar Savarkar, the party forgot that Indira Gandhi endorsed him as a patriot in the past. She even issued a commemorative stamp in Savarkar’s honour in 1970 and made a private donation of Rs 11,000 to his memorial fund.

Indira hated none. She exemplified how one can have a peaceful mind and a progressive mindset without having to shy away from nationalism and religion.

She was such a devout Hindu that she used to wear Rudraksha, visit temples, keep fasts, and counsel astrologers – all without flinching. For the present-day Congress, all of this is a phobia.

Perhaps, that’s the reason why the Congress, which was once known as the Hindu Congress, is now termed as anti-Hindu. After Indira and Rajiv, Hindus thought that they could never associate with Congress as they failed to identify with Sonia Gandhi. Their quest for a Hindu leader ultimately led to the rise of the BJP and Hindu forces in the country.

And not just Hinduism, Congress also ceded patriotism to the right-wing. The same party whose Indira once split Pakistan into two, today questions Pulwama attack. There was a time when Indira Gandhi used to scare the bejesus out of Pakistan. Today, Congress leaders are often seen speaking the language of Pakistan.

Electoral punches, one after another, have knocked the wind out of Congress’ sails. And the reasons could be many. Call it the party’s failure to do justice to the erstwhile Congress – the party that struggled to bring Independence, or to the legacy of two charismatic leaders who were assassinated serving the nation. The bottom line is: the present-day Congress is nothing like the Congress of the past.

The hegemony and control that Narendra Modi enjoys today, it was once a reality for Indira Gandhi and Congress. After Indira Gandhi’s demise, this dominance reduced to 50%, and after Rajiv Gandhi’s death, it came down to 25%. Today, it has come to naught.

And now, when the Congress is gawking at a credibility crisis, Indira’s soul must be crying in pain – for instead of saving her legacy, her legatees are busy tarnishing it. The nationalist and patriotic Indira who wore her patriotism and nationalism on her sleeve, must be watching from the heavens with agony, that her once nationalist Congress is now rejected by Indians for being Anti National- as her party has developed phobia towards anything that’s nationalist.

So long as Congress stays oblivious to the Indira Gandhi playbook, its decline is seemingly inexorable. There are plenty of reasons for the fall of Congress in India. How it changed for the worse after Indira Gandhi is definitely one of them.

Last but not the least, her grandchildren, Rahul Gandhi and Priyanka Gandhi Vadra, should have been the torchbearers of their great grandmother’s great legacy but unfortunately, they represent anything that reminds us of great Iron Lady- Indira Gandhi.

Facebook Twitter Linkedin Email Disclaimer Views expressed above are the author's own.
