How Living Alone In Delhi Inevitably Changed My Perception Of 'Safe Dressing'

I was born and raised in Guwahati, Assam and contrary to the basic perception of mainland Indians about my state being entirely covered by tea plantations and under the constant threat of tribal militia, it is a pretty progressive and peaceful place! The weather is pleasant, the people good natured, and mindsets are liberal.

Daughters are spoilt rotten by the fathers just by the virtue of their XX chromosomes in the best of situations or, at the least, treated as equals to their brothers, and society does not necessarily look at us as prey. Of course, perverts lurk in all societies but the ratio of molesters is lower than the rest of Indian states. Hence, what I wore there was never dictated by how easily I could be harassed.

My entire perception of dressing ‘safe’ so as to avoid rape changed when I started living on my own in Delhi. As much as I enjoyed using this newfound anonymity to my advantage to stay out late and embrace the vibrant nightlife, I was always aware that “my safety was in my own hands.” As messed up as it was, I had to watch out for myself to stay safe.

Studying at a fashion college allowed me to experiment with clothing, and opened me to a very inclusive and safe space. But as soon as I stepped out of the campus, the exact opposite was true. I began opting for pants over short skirts, a light jacket to cover my strapless tops, and a scarf to cover any visible cleavage. I tried to reprimand myself for this as I could see myself succumbing to the forces of patriarchy but, sadly, the harsh reality was that it was easier to dress ‘modest’ if it meant that my existence was respected than to chant the slogans of feminism to a bunch of tone-deaf aggressors who’d misbehave with me every chance they got!

Whenever I heard spine-chilling tales of my friends getting catcalled and stalked in nightclubs, jerked off at in concert and cabs, or harassed at their workplace, I’d wonder how exposed arms (bicep, elbow, and wrist) could possibly turn someone on; or how an extra open button of a shirt could equate to being ‘easy’, ‘slutty’, or ‘giving out mixed signals’; or how that three-year-old’s frilly dress could make her uncle horny.

Of course, living on my own made me more vocal about my rights but also made me watch every step I took because I, a woman in India, didn’t have the privilege to live life the way I wanted to because my fellow brothers couldn’t lay eyes on me and not rape me. If they did understand consent, I’d have to be vocally grateful because he would flaunt it like a rare virtue and not as a basic human trait.

I hope someday my daughter can grab an ice cream with her friends after dinner in her shorts and not get kidnapped because someone got turned on by her exposed bra strap and bare adolescent legs. I hope men get sensitised that it’s not our job to protect ourselves but their job to treat us as fellow humans for once.

Lead image credits © Mohd Shahrizal CC BY 2.0
