Maha Likely to Become ‘Severe’ Cyclone Today

A tree falls due to heavy rain and strong winds in Kochi, Kerala on Wednesday, October 30 (Credits: Rakesh Nair/TOI, BCCL, Thiruvananthapuram)

Cyclone Maha will batter the archipelago of Lakshadweep while bringing 100-200 mm rain today to isolated parts of Ernakulam, Thrissur, Malappuram and Kozhikode districts. Isolated heavy rainfall (up to 100 mm) is foreseen in all other districts of Kerala, the India Meteorological Department said.

As of Thursday morning, Cyclone Maha was located about 30 km east-southeast of Aminidivi, 60 km north-northeast of Kavaratti and 300 km north of Minicoy in Lakshadweep. Its current position puts it 300 km west-southwest of Kozhikode (Kerala) on the mainland.

Lakshadweep is the only region under red alert for Thursday. However, orange alerts have been issued for the four above-mentioned Kerala districts. Weather bureau officials in Karnataka also expect heavy to very heavy rainfall in coastal Karnataka, Dakshina Kannada, Udupi and Uttara Kannada today. While Tamil Nadu will also see some effect of Cyclone Maha, authorities up to Wednesday night had not issued any alerts, and the Chennai office indicated that only light to moderate rains were expected across the state this week.

Advertisement The IMD expects Maha to intensify into a Severe Cyclonic Storm today morning, and a ‘Very Severe’ Cyclonic Storm by Friday night. Unlike its predecessor, Cyclone Kyarr—which became the strongest storm in the Arabian Sea in 12 years with 250 km/h winds—Cyclone Maha will reach a peak wind speed 150-160, gusting to 180 km/h by Monday evening.

According to Weather.com’s forecasts, Cyclone Maha should largely remain in the sea till Monday as it steadily curves northwest towards Oman and the Arabian mainland.

Maha's movement off the Indian west coast (weather.com)

The winds will be highest over Lakshadweep, at 80-90 km/h gusting to 100 km/h on Thursday. In Tamil Nadu and Puducherry, 50-60 km/h winds gusting to 70 km/h are likely over the Gulf of Mannar, south TN and Comorin (Kanyakumari). The coast of mainland Kerala as well as Karnataka will be buffeted by 40-50 km/h winds, gusting up to 60 km/h. Lightning and thunderstorm is possible in all these areas, and fisher-folk have been cautioned to stay away from the water.

The rains are expected to ease in Kerala from Friday onwards, with only isolated heavy rain expected in Kozhikode, Kannur, Kasargode and Lakshadweep.
