'Report to duty or you will be replaced': Health Minister warns protesting TN doctors

'Report to duty or you will be replaced': Health Minister warns protesting TN doctors

Nearly 16,000 government doctors across Tamil Nadu launched an indefinite strike on October 25 over four demands.

news Doctors strike

The Tamil Nadu government issued an ultimatum to protesting doctors in the state on the seventh day of protests, threatening to replace them if they did not report to duty. Health Minister Vijayabaskar said that a count will be taken of missing doctors and the vacancies will be filled through fresh recruitment or transfers.

Nearly 16,000 government doctors across Tamil Nadu launched an indefinite strike on October 25 over four demands. The doctors belong to various groups under the Federation of Government Doctors Association (FOGDA) in the state. The protest at the Rajiv Gandhi General Hospital is being led by five doctors, who belong to Chennai, Tiruvallur and Tiruvannamalai districts. The doctors have been sitting on a hunger strike in front of the hospital from Friday.

The state government has however refused to give in to their demands. The Health department pointed out that FOGDA is not recognised by the government and that the only recognised doctors' association pulled out of the strike on Tuesday night after talks with the state government.

"Poor and underprivileged people require medical services. We are not saying we will not talk. We are ready to meet, speak and discuss. We will take count of the doctors tomorrow who report for duty and submit it to DPH, DMS and DME. If doctors don't arrive, their positions will be declared vacant and the government won't hesitate to declare those positions as empty," warned Health Minister Vijayabhaskar.

With the strike on, doctors are only available for emergency OP, emergency surgeries and dengue OP. They are available for dengue OP as there is a dengue outbreak in the state, and the government highlighted cases of dengue to warn medicos against striking.

The doctors have listed four key demands from the government — periodic salary raise and promotions from the state health department; rectification of all inconsistencies in GO 4(D)2 (the government order implementing the staffing pattern to the hospitals so as to strengthen the health care delivery systems and sanctioning of posts as per the Medical Council of India guidelines and hiring people according to patient strength; 50% state-wise reservation for PG speciality and super speciality courses; and fourth, transparent counselling while appointing those who have completed their PGs.
