Removal of Tipu Sultan’s name from school textbooks may damage peace in society: Congress

Tipu Sultan

Key Highlights Karnataka CM BS Yediyurappa said that he does not agree with people who say that Tipu Sultan was a freedom fighter The state government cancelled the Tipu Jayanti celebrations after coming to power Congress leader TB Jayachandra said that removing Tipu's name from school books may damage peace in the society

Bengaluru: After Karnataka Chief Minister BS Yediyurappa said that the state government is considering a proposal to remove Tipu Sultan’s name from school textbooks, former state’s law minister and Congress leader TB Jayachandra said that doing so may damage peace in the society.

Yediyurappa had earlier said that Tipu Sultan was a tyrant who persecuted Hindus due to which the BJP government in the state was considering removing the lesson from the school history books. He further said that any decision on the matter would be taken after the committee submits its report.

“Any BJP leader who comes from Kodagu region will demand to remove Tipu Sultan’s name from history. But just to satisfy them, a senior leader like Yediyurappa should not take such decision to remove Tipu Sultan’s name,” news agency ANI quoted Jayachandra as saying.

The Karnataka CM had also said that he does not agree with people who say that Tipu Sultan was a freedom fighter.

The call for the removal of the 18th-century ruler from school books was given by BJP MLA Appachu Ranjan after which State Education Minister Suresh Kumar wrote to the Managing Director of Karnataka Textbook Society, directing him to submit a report in three days.

Ranjan also said that Tipu Sultan came to Kodagu, Mangaluru and other parts of the state to not only expand his territory but also to convert people to his religion and to boost his kingdom.

He also said that the ‘Tiger of Mysore’ had no respect for Kannada as his administrative language was Persian.

“He changed names of places - Madikeri to Jafarabad and Mangaluru to Jalalabad. He looted many temples and Christian churches as well. In Kodagu, he converted 30,000 Kodavas,” Ranjan had said.

Responding to the BJP MLA's statement, Md Shahid Alam, a descendant of Tipu Sultan, said that it is “shameful” that the former ruler was being targeted by the ruling dispensation for vote bank politics.

Earlier today while addressing the media after the completion of 100 days in office, Yediyurappa said that the BJP government will not celebrate the birth anniversary of Tipu Sultan on November 10.

Soon after the Yediyurappa-led BJP government came to power in the state, it cancelled the Tipu Jayanti celebrations with the CM making it clear that there will not be any change in his government’s official position over the issue.

Slamming the BJP over this decision, former Chief Minister Siddaramaiah said that doing so would be akin to twisting reality and history.
