Patel inspiration behind abrogation of Art 370: PM

editorial@tribune.com

Manas Dasgupta

Kevadiya Colony (Gujarat), Oct 31

Dedicating his government’s decision to abrogate Article 370 in Jammu and Kashmir to Sardar Vallabhbhai Patel, Prime Minister Narendra Modi today cautioned Pakistan against spreading separatism and terrorism to weaken the country’s unity.

Paying tributes to the “Iron Man of India” on his 144th birth anniversary at the Statue of Unity here in central Gujarat, Modi without naming Pakistan said the country which could not win a war against India was trying to destroy the country’s unity through subversive methods of spreading separatism and terrorism.

“But for centuries, no such efforts have succeeded to damage our unity in diversity and will not succeed in future and no one will be able to annihilate us or defeat us,” he added.

“Unity in diversity is our pride and our identity,” Modi said. Stating that Article 370 “bred only separatism and terrorism” in Jammu and Kashmir resulting in loss of over 40,000 lives in that region in the past three decades, Modi said he was dedicating the “historic decision” to the Sardar who had dreamt of such a united India without the “temporary wall” of Article 370 giving the region a special status that separated Jammu and Kashmir from the rest of the country.

In an indirect jibe at Pt Jawaharlal Nehru, the PM claimed that Sardar had once stated that if he handled the Kashmir issue, it would not have taken such a long time to resolve it.

Modi said it was significant that Jammu and Kashmir was taking its first leap towards progress and development on the birth anniversary day of Sardar Patel.

Modi also took salute at “Ekta Parade” of different security forces, conducted an oath-taking ceremony of people for national integration and unity, inaugurated several tourist attractions around the Statue of Unity and also addressed a gathering of probationary officers of civil services before returning to Delhi.

“North-East is now moving from separatism to attachment as decades-old problems are nearing resolution,” Modi said, referring to his government’s initiatives to bring peace to the insurgency-affected region.

Addressing the probationary civil services officers, Modi advised them to take every decision keeping the national perspective in mind.
