No adverse weather likely over Lakshadweep as Cyclone MAHA moves northwestwards: IMD

Cyclone Mahe (Source: IMD) | Photo Credit: Twitter

Bengaluru: The Arabian sea witnessed a peculiar case of two cyclonic formations recorded for the first time ever, said the India Meteorological Department (IMD). It said the severe cyclonic storm ‘MAHA is likely to intensify into a ‘very severe’ cyclonic storm over the east-central Arabian Sea during the next 24 hours.

The weatherman warned of heavy rainfall over some areas of Lakshadweep islands, Kerala, coastal Karnataka and Tamil Nadu over the next 24 hours. But there will be no adverse weather over Lakshadweep as the cyclone is moving away northwestwards, said the weather agency on Friday.

“Light to moderate rainfall at most places with heavy falls at isolated places over Lakshadweep during next 24hrs. Light to moderate rainfall at most places with heavy to very heavy falls at isolated places very likely over Kerala, coastal Karnataka & south Tamil Nadu during 24hrs,” IMD earlier warned.

Cyclone MAHA has moved north-northwestwards at a speed of 18 kilometres in the past six hours and likely to move west-northwards in the next 6 hours.

The weather agency also warned of “heavy to very heavy rainfall” over parts of south India such as Karnataka coast, coastal areas of Andhra Pradesh, Rayalseema and south interior Karnataka in the next 24 hours.

Severe Cyclonic Storm MAHA lay centered over eastcentral Arabian Sea about 300 km north of Cherapani Reef. No adverse waether is likely over Lakshadweep Islands as the cyclone is moving away northwestwards. pic.twitter.com/8ByrviJXMl — India Met. Dept. (@Indiametdept) November 1, 2019

It said that Cyclone Kyarr will move towards south-southwards in the next 24 hours from the west-central Arabian Sea.

"It is very likely to move southwestwards across the west-central Arabian Sea during the next 36 hours. It is very likely to weaken into a Deep Depression during the next six hours and further into a Depression during the subsequent six hours", it said.

IMD predicts the sea condition to be rough in parts of Arabian Sea and advised fishermen not to venture into the Lakshadweep area.

“Sea condition high-very high over the east-central Arabian Sea & very likely to be high over the west-central Arabian Sea. Fishermen advised not to venture into Lakshadweep area and adjoining the southeast Arabian Sea, along and off Karnataka-Goa-Maharashtra coasts and the west-central Arabian Sea,” IMD warned.
