Cyclone Maha: Holiday for schools and colleges in Kannur and Kasaragode

Cyclone Maha: Holiday for schools and colleges in Kannur and Kasaragode

IMD forecast isolated heavy rainfall in Kannur, Kasargode and Kozhikode.

news Cyclone Maha

The District Collectors of Kannur and Kasaragode have declared a holiday on Friday for all educational institutions following heavy rains caused by Cyclone Maha. While exams have been postponed in Kannur University and Mahatma Gandhi University due to rains, in Kasaragode, exams will be held as per schedule.

A holiday has been declared for all educational institutions on Friday in the coastal taluks of Ponanni, Thirur and Thirurangadi. In Thrissur, Kodungallur and Chavakad taluks will see a holiday for all educational institutions on Friday. However, there will be no change in schedule for university exams in these two districts.

The India Meteorological Department (IMD) had issued a yellow warning, alerting officials to ‘be updated’ in Kannur, Kasaragod and Kozhikode after Cyclone Maha intensified into a severe cyclonic storm on Friday. IMD forecast isolated heavy rainfall in the three districts.

In its weather bulletin at 9am on Friday, IMD stated that Cyclone Maha had moved away from the Lakshadweep islands, but noted, “It is very likely to move northwestwards during next 06 hours. Then, it is very likely to move northwestwards during subsequent 06 hours and thereafter move west-northwestwards. It is very likely to intensify into a very severe cyclonic storm over eastcentral Arabian Sea during next 12 hours.”

The IMD has also issued a yellow warning in Lakshadweep on Friday.

The 9am bulletin also warned that the sea conditions is high to very high over eastcentral Arabian Sea during next 12 hours and “will become phenomenal from today evening for subsequent 04 days and over eastcentral and adjoining west central Arabian Sea on 5th November.”

Meteorologists also advised a total suspension of fishing operations over Lakshadweep area and adjoining southeast Arabian Sea during next the six hours and along and off Karnataka-Goa- Maharashtra coasts during next 24 hours. It also further advised fishermen not to venture into the eastcentral Arabian Sea until November 6.
