SBI warns customers against fraudulent income tax refund messages

Representative Image | Photo Credit: BCCL

New Delhi: India's largest public-sector lender, the State Bank of India (SBI), has warned its customers against fraudulent income tax refund messages which may end up compromising the safety of their accounts and bank deposits.

The bank said in a tweet, "Received any message from the Income Tax Department, requesting you to put in a formal request for your refund? These messages are from fraudsters at play! Ensure you ignore and report the messages immediately."

Received any message from the Income Tax Department, requesting you to put in a formal request for your refund? These messages are from fraudsters at play! Ensure you ignore and report the messages immediately. For more security tips, visit https://t.co/U3XVLPyP8W pic.twitter.com/vHCL2PBvyz — State Bank of India (@TheOfficialSBI) November 1, 2019

Here's a list of precautions suggested by the bank to avoid fraudsters:

1. Access your bank website only by typing the URL in the address bar of your browser.

2. Be aware of downloading any malicious application from mobile application stores (Google Playstore, Apple App Store, Blackberry App World, Ovi Store, Windows Marketplace etc) that are offering Online Banking. Always check their authenticity before downloading, by contacting your Bank.

3. Do not click on any links in any e-mail message to access the site.

4. SBI or any of its representative never sends email/SMS or calls customers over phone to get their personal information, password or one time SMS (high security) password. Any such e-mail/SMS or phone call is an attempt to fraudulently withdraw money from your account through Internet Banking.

5. Never respond to such email/SMS or phone call. Report immediately on report dot phishing at sbi.co.in if you receive any such e-mail/SMS or Phone call. Lock your user access immediately, if you have accidentally revealed your credentials.

6. Do not be lured if you receive an e-mail/SMS/phone call promising reward for providing your personal information or for updating your account details in the bank site.

According to the bank, these things will improve your internet security:
