Opposition gives Imran two days to step down

The opposition parties demanded on Friday that Prime Minister Imran Khan and his administration resign within two days, raising the stakes in a protest campaign that the government has denounced as a threat to democracy.

“I’m giving a two-day deadline for the resignation,” Jamiat Ulema-e-Islam-Fazl chief Maulana Fazlur Rehman told a rally of thousands of supporters in the federal capital. “Now this government has to go but we don’t want a collision with institutions,” he said referring to the military. “We want state institutions to be impartial and withdraw their support to this illegitimate government,” he said while addressing the rally. “I want to speak to the institutions that we desire to see them stable and powerful but also impartial,” he went on to say. “If we feel that the institutions continue to protect these incompetent and illegal rulers, then we’ll be free to form an opinion about that institution,” he said. “We cannot show more patience … we are giving two days’ time otherwise the people have the capability to enter the PM House by force and arrest the prime minister,” he added.

Along with Fazl, leaders of Pakistan Muslim League-Nawaz (PML-N), Pakistan People’s Party (PPP), and Awami National Party (ANP) also addressed the marchers encamped at the designated venue in Sector H-9.

Fazl said the Pakistan Tehreek-e-Insaf (PTI) government has no right to rule the country as it came into power through ‘systematic rigging’ in the 2018 general elections. “We reject the results of rigged elections. This prime minister should resign,” he said.

Strongly criticising the government’s policies, the JUI-F chief said the PTI-government vowed to give employment and houses to millions but instead they ‘demolished houses of five million people’. He said the prime minister had promised that his government would improve the economy to the extent that people from overseas would seek jobs in the country. “Only two people have sought employment in Pakistan from abroad – the FBR chairman and the State Bank governor,” he said, adding that people are committing suicide due to the dire economic condition and the common man is in constant state of torment.

The JUI-F chief also lashed out at the government for alleging that he was using the religion card to instigate the masses. “Who are you to deny me the right when our constitution talks about religion,” he asked. “Who are you to deny me my rights that are enshrined in the constitution?” he further asked.

Commenting on the Kashmir issue, he said the PTI government has caused severe damages to the cause. “We will fight for the rights of Kashmiris,” he vowed. “On one hand our relations with India are strained due to Kashmir conflict and on the other we are opening Kartarpur Corridor for Sikh pilgrims,” he added. Earlier, PML-N President Shehbaz Sharif, while addressing the rally, said the Azadi March is the first step in the opposition’s movement to dislodge the federal government. He criticised the government for its anti-poor policies and attitude and questioned the decision-making process of Imran Khan.

The former chief minister denounced Imran Khan as a ‘brainless’ leader and said the prime minister’s decisions are more dependent on ‘sorcery’ and ‘supernatural guidance’. “If God gives us the opportunity, we will put up a united front and work on fixing Pakistan’s economy. Imran Khan has a lot of support from all institutions – if we had only 10% of that support, we would have taken Pakistan on a Sputnik-like flight,” he said. “This protest will sweep away Imran Khan and his government,” he asserted.

Responding to PM Imran’s criticism, the PML-N president reminded the prime minister that it was the PTI that set a precedent for such protests. “If Imran Niazi remains in power any longer, Pakistan’s situation will only further deteriorate. This sea of humans has made it clear that now is the time for change. We will rebuild Pakistan once again under the leadership of Nawaz Sharif and our economy will be on its feet again within six months,” he claimed.

Security was tight in Islamabad with the government and diplomatic enclave – just a few miles from the rally site – sealed off, roads blocked by barriers of shipping containers. Schools are closed, public transport suspended and internet services interrupted in some areas, a service provider said.

The government had beefed up security ahead of the marchers’ arrival in Islamabad, deploying police and Rangers in Red Zone as well as Faizabad Interchange, Kashmir Highway and other locations. The government has deployed 6,000 personnel of police and Rangers for the security of the protest venue in the H-9 area of Islamabad. Police sources said the law enforcement personnel deployed at the venue have been strictly directed to behave politely with the marchers. However, they have also been told to take strict action if the participants of the march tried to travel to some other area of the city.
