Former MP protests against RCEP: ‘It will spell doom for dairy farmers’

Raju Shetti said milllions of dairy farmers were under threat due to RCEP. File

Former MP and Swabhimani Paksha leader Raju Shetti has written to the central government protesting against the proposed Regional Comprehensive Economic Partnership (RCEP). In a letter to Prime Minister Narendra Modi, Shetti said RCEP would “spell doom for dairy farmers” in the country.

RCEP is a proposed free trade agreement between 10 member states of ASEAN and its six members of FTA.

This agreement will form the largest economic bloc in the world allowing for free trade between members.

Formally launched in November 2012, India is one of the signatories of the RCEP, which has raised the antennas of many sectors in the country. The dairy industry is one of the sectors that fear availability of cheap imports from countries like New Zealand would hamper its prospects.

In his letter, farmers’ leader Shetti stated that by signing RCEP, India will open its door for cheap imports in the dairy and other agricultural sectors. Other than the dairy sector, the former MP said the agreement has been opposed by steel and the manufacturing industries.

“Along with this, sectors like toy, pharmaceuticals, electronics, generic medicines etc have also protested against this,” Shetti’s letter read. He claimed that India was being looked upon by global markets, which plan to flood the country with cheap imports.

Shetti said milllions of dairy farmers were under threat due to RCEP.

He said the country has large trade deficit with the RCEP countries and the proposed agreement will allow other countries to “balance their economics” by sending cheap imports to India. “All these countries are looking to get out of recession through this,” he said.

Urging the prime minister to consider the matter, Shetti said one of the leaders in the government had made it a prestige issue.

He said this agreement will be a “suicide trap” for the country and urged the prime minister not to go ahead with it.
