Charity comm plans for a booster shot to revive ‘sick’ hospitals

Smaller medical facilities, which are struggling with fewer footfalls, lack of infrastructure and less funding to treat poor patients, are to be provided fresh funds via trusts, private entities, under new initiative of charity commissioner



Reports of patients below the poverty line (BPL) struggling to avail of medical treatment are hardly ever in short supply, leading to serious questions being raised about the government’s ability to help out the financially weakest sections of our society. To add to this chaos, a number of hospitals have for long cited their increasing inability to commit to charitable activity, thanks to a dire shortage of payments given to them by the authorities for this purpose.



But now, a resuscitation of this humanitarian effort may be around the corner. The joint charity commissioner of Pune has decided to provide aid to floundering hospitals, which are at this point struggling for survival. For this purpose, the charity commissionerate plans to approach other trusts, companies, and private institutes requesting them to aid the ‘sick’ hospitals that are on verge of closing due to shortage of funds and footfalls. While this is expected to help the smaller hospitals survive, the initiative is aimed at eventually helping society at large, said officials related to the development.



~~71859567~~

The Pune charity commissionerate has 58 charitable hospitals registered with it. As per rules decreed by the Bombay High Court, these hospitals support the Indigent Patients Fund (IPF) scheme, wherein poor patients are treated for free or at discounted rates.



Over time, however, it has been found that a mere handful of these hospitals have achieved a certain level of fame and seem to be running this scheme relatively smoothly, including Aditya Birla Memorial Hospital (ABMH), Ruby Hall Clinic, Pune, Deenanath Mangeshkar Hospital, Jehangir Hospital, and Inlaks and Budhrani Hospital — however, this also means that they are running low on IPF funds.



Meanwhile, several medical facilities that have less than 100 beds are struggling to stay afloat, with their funding almost over as well, and fewer patients approaching them.



The latest initiative to help the latter is the brainchild of joint charity commissioner, Pune, Dilip Deshmukh. He told Mirror, “Patients suffering from any diseases, even general health issues, generally head to the big hospitals. This leads to overcrowding at these facilities, and their funds get exhausted early on. Once other institutes have better facilities for screening and other equipment, they can also take some burden off from the larger hospitals.”



~~71859575~~

Some of the medical institutes having a bad time at the moment include Sanjeevan Hospital, Sterling Hospital, Tarachand Hospital, Morya Hospital, Sane Guruji Hospital, Lokmanaya Hospital and others. Many of these have already exhausted their IPF funding, and most need urgent upgrades, said officials.



Added Deshmukh, “We have decided to approach some trusts that are currently helping poor patients for surgeries and other health issues. Some trusts are ready to help hospitals, which will then be made capable of handling the huge burden of patients. Smaller hospitals will get patients and people will get treatment. We hope citizens facing general health issues and general surgeries head to these places.”



Deputy charity commissioner of Pune, Navnath Jagtap, echoed that most patients head to brands like Ruby Hall Clinic, Jehangir Hospital and more, which are already packed to capacity. “So, their funds get exhausted. We need to maintain a balance that will be helpful not just to hospitals but also patients,” he said, adding, “The hospitals are doing a great job — we want to help them overcome their troubles. We have decided to approach other trusts for funds. We are in the process of listing hospitals and trustees to approach.”



From one of the enterprises that stand to benefit, Dr Rakesh Neve, director of Sterling Hospital, said, “We get numerous patients from various areas of the city and district — we cannot deny treatment. Sometimes, due to shortage of funds, patients are denied treatment at other hospitals and referred to us. The fund infusion will definitely help distribute the load and develop the hospitals that need it. Patients with specific problems should also be referred to hospitals based on the specialty of the latter.”



While he appreciated the move, Charitable Hospitals’ Association president Bomi Bhote also cautioned that the final decision on selecting a hospital remains with the patient. The chief executive officer (CEO) of Ruby Hall Clinic said, “The idea is good — many big hospitals have been facing problems due to dwindling funds. Everyone is doing their best, but funds are required to treat a patient. We appreciate the effort and hope the condition of smaller hospitals improves now.”


