Delhi: Unclaimed bag at T3 sparks panic, airport shut for 3 hours

Sending the security establishment into a tizzy, an unclaimed bag, initially suspected to contain explosives, was recovered from IGI Airport’s Terminal 3 late Thursday night. Police said an explosive vapour detector (EVD) machine and a sniffer dog had indicated the bag could contain explosives, following which it was sent to a ‘cooling pit’.

Panic spread following the discovery of the bag, as arrival gates were shut and the airport sealed for three hours.

Around 9 pm Friday, however, a man reached IGI police station to claim the bag, saying he had left it behind by mistake. He said the bag contained clothes, chocolates, earrings, a charger and toys — and when authorities opened it, they found the same things. The man, Shahid Hussain, had come to Delhi from Mumbai, police said.

Police said the black trolley bag was found outside arrival gate number 2 at 12.56 am, in an area which didn’t have extensive CCTV coverage. Constable V K Singh of the CISF found it lying under a seat at the forecourt, and alerted seniors. The bag was then checked by an EVD machine.

Sanjay Bhatia, DCP (Airport) said, “A guide dog also checked the bag and confirmed there could be an explosive inside. The arrival gates were immediately shut — passengers, cab drivers and others at T3 were alerted and told to leave. The bomb detection and disposal squad (BDDS) was called and the bag was scanned. An X-Ray of the bag wasn’t clear, so it was sent to the cooling pit.” Security at the airport was beefed up and T3 became functional from 4 am onwards.

Before the man came forward, M Ganapathy, CISF Special DG, Airport, had said it was too early to confirm whether there were explosives inside the bag. EVD machine and sniffer dogs are extremely sensitive when it comes to detecting such content, he said.

“For instance, if there was a bullet cartridge or weapon kept in the bag four-six months ago, the tests would detect those and be positive for explosive content. The tests don’t confirm there’s RDX or some other explosive inside,” Ganapathy said. Later in the day, he said the bag’s contents were “harmless” and the bag had been returned to its owner.

Meanwhile, people recalled that those inside the airport weren’t allowed to leave, while those outside were told to clear out the area, leading to some tense hours.

Govinder (45), a cab driver, said, “Around 1 am, we saw CISF men outside gate 2. We thought they were clearing the way for a VIP, but later, police told us to leave immediately. We took passengers away from the airport.”

Anurag, who works at a cafe, said: “I saw CISF officers gathering in front of the sitting area. They told us to leave. We felt scared when we saw some passengers panicking. I and other employees of the food court immediately left the airport.”
