Maharashtra: BJP confident of forming govt, Shiv Sena keeps options open as Congress, NCP wait and watch

The BJP and the Shiv Sena are yet to come to an agreement over how to share power in Maharashtra (Getty photos)

The political situation in Maharashtra remains in flux more than a week after the state's election results were announced. On Saturday, a Congress MP asked the party high command to extend support to the Shiv Sena even as the latter continued its bluster, warning the BJP that it has other options if the party refuses to agree to its demands.

The Shiv Sena and the BJP, who fought the Maharashtra election in an alliance, have the numbers to form the government, but the parties have been fighting over the chief minister's post. The Shiv Sena wants the chief minister's to be rotated between the two parties while the BJP is no mood to do so.

On Saturday, the Shiv Sena mouthpiece Samana criticised the BJP over a comment made by the outgoing government's Finance Minister Sudhir Mungatiwar. Mungatiwar had said President's rule would have to be imposed in Maharashtra if a new government does not take oath before the end of the term of the current Maharashtra assembly (November 9).

An editorial in the Samana said the BJP was threatening the party "like Mughals". The editorial said Mungatiwar's "threatening" statement was "against democracy and unconstitutional".

BJP CONFIDENT

Meanwhile, the Bharatiya Janata Party seems confident of forming the next government. On Saturday, Sudhir Mungatiwar said that the swearing-in of the new government will take place on November 6 or 7 and expressed hope that Shiv Sena would come around.

"It is the duty of the BJP and Shiv Sena to respect the mandate. How to share ministerial berths can be worked out through discussions," Mungatiwar said. "If the tiger (which is the Sena's mascot) is growling, I am forest minister, and we know how to preserve and conserve the tiger. We will take the tiger along," Mungwatiwar also said.

Meanwhile, Maharashtra BJP president Chandrakant Patil chaired a meeting of state BJP leaders in Mumbai. "Our leadership is capable of dealing with this impasse," Patil said after the meeting.

CONGRESS, NCP MAKE MOVES

In Delhi, interim Congress president Sonia Gandhi held a meeting with the party's Maharashtra leaders Friday evening. It is learnt that during the meeting, Sonia Gandhi told the leaders that for the Congress, the BJP and the Shiv Sena are the same.

However, the leaders are believed to have told Sonia Gandhi that politically, Shiv Sena is more amiable than BJP on many issues. The Congress for now is adopting a wait and watch strategy.

Meanwhile on Saturday, Congress Rajya Sabha MP Hussain Dalwai wrote to Sonia Gandhi asking to her to get the party to extend support to Shiv Sena in case such a proposal came up. Dalwai's stand was welcomed by the Shiv Sena.

All eyes now will be on Monday when NCP chief Sharad Pawar is expected to meet Sonia Gandhi in Delhi. "Sharad Pawar will visit Delhi on Monday. I have information that he and Sonia Gandhi had spoken over phone recently...he will speak to her (in Delhi)....A lot depends on what they discuss," senior NCP leader Ajit Pawar said.

"But the Congress and NCP have maintained right from the day of results that they have been mandated to sit in opposition. We have prepared ourselves to sit in opposition," Pawar added.

MAHARASHTRA ELECTION

The Bharatiya Janata Party emerged as the single-largest party and along with its ally Shiv Sena won enough seats to comfortably form government.

However, the Shiv Sena has been playing hardball ever since the election results were announced. The Sena has demanded that the BJP agree to rotate the chief minister's post between the two parties.

The Sena claims that an agreement to share the chief minister's chair was arrived at between the two parties long before the state elections were announced. The BJP, on the other hand, has denied the existence of such an agreement.

The Shiv Sena has gone to the extent of demanding that the BJP give it a written assurance that it will rotate the Maharashtra chief minister's post between the two parties. The BJP, of course, has refused to do so.

With political stalemate in Maharashtra continuing, the Congress and its ally Nationalist Congress Parties have been flexing their muscles and making noises about joining hands with the Shiv Sena to keep the BJP out of power. The Shiv Sena, too, has warned that the BJP that it has "other" options.

Arithmetically speaking, no party can form government in Maharashtra without the help of any other party; the number of other parties and independents that won in the election is too insignificant to help a party cross the majority mark.

The possible combinations in Maharashtra include: BJP-Shiv Sena, Congress-NCP-Shiv Sena, BJP-NCP and BJP-Congress.

Who will actually come to power in Maharashtra is something that still remains unclear.
