KSPCB gets cracking as apartments pollute Chikkabanavara lake

A number of apartment complexes that have come up on the periphery of the vast Chikkabanavara lake in northwest Bengaluru are discharging untreated sewage into the lake, pushing another water body into decay.The Karnataka State Pollution Control Board ( KSPCB ) that issues consent for establishment (CfE) and consent for operation (CfO) for sewage treatment plants of residential and commercial buildings, recently issued notices to nine apartments around the lake for violating the provisions of the Water and Air Act The inspection carried out by the Board officials has revealed that all these apartments discharge untreated sewage to the storm water drain using PVC pipe and the SWD flows into the lake. In several of these apartments, the CfO, which has to be renewed before expiry, has not not been renewed for many years.The KSPCB called the apartment builders and residents’ welfare associations for personal hearing last week in which many of the RWAs pleaded ignorance of the fact that the sewage is discharged into the lake. Board member-secretary Manoj Kumar said he saw multiple problems in these apartments. “In a few cases, the builder has not even handed over the property to the RWA. Hence, he is solely responsible for the violation. And in some of the cases, though the property’s possession has been given to RWAs, there was an abrupt hand over. In such cases, the RWA members admitted they did not even know how the STP functions,” Kumar said.There are also cases where building associations have paid the Bangalore Water Supply and Sewerage Board (BWSSB) for laying underground drainage to get sewage treated at the 5 MLD sewage treatment plant built near the lake. But this, too, has been a futile exercise, as the BWSSB is yet to lay the underground drainage (UGD) in the area.However, what is interesting is the way in which the KSPCB failed to take action against these violators all these years. Most of these buildings under the Board’s radar are 10-15 years old and are known polluters.“There are many more such buildings, including apartments, hospitals and industries, that are letting untreated sewage to Chikkabanavara lake. The authorities should take strict action against them before the lake becomes yet another Bellandur,” said Naveen Kumar, a resident of Chikkabanavara villagers.The 170-acre water body spread over three villages — Ganigarahalli, Kereguddadahalli, Chikkabanavara — is polluted by buildings under the Bruhat Bengaluru Mahanagara Palike (BBMP) limits. “Karnataka Lokayukta has taken up the issue and has warned the authorities to take strict action against violators. Unfortunately, the authorities act only when they hear from the courts. That is reason why the massive lake is polluted,” said V Ramprasad from Friends of Lakes.The KSPCB member-secretary said that the Board has given one month to a few RWAs to rectify the issue and get their sewage treated. “We have asked everyone to submit compliance report, failing which they will face stringent action,” Kumar said.The KSPCB has given one month to a few residents’ welfare associations to rectify the issue and get their sewage treated
