Pawar may meet Sonia today

shalender@tribune.com

Shiv Kumar

Tribune News Service

Mumbai, November 2

Nationalist Congress Party (NCP) chief Sharad Pawar is likely to meet Congress president Sonia Gandhi tomorrow to discuss formation of a coalition government in Maharashtra, according to sources here.

Pawar was earlier due to meet her on Monday, but the meeting has been preponed amid indication that Devendra Fadnavis may stake claim to form the government even without the Shiv Sena support. One of the proposals being considered is that the Congress will provide outside support to a coalition government by the Shiv Sena and the NCP. Congress leaders are divided on joining hands with the Shiv Sena.

While former CMs Prithviraj Chavan and Ashok Chavan are said to be keen on forming a non-BJP government, other leaders such as Sushilkumar Shinde and AICC general secretary in-charge of Maharashtra Mallikarjun Kharge want the Congress to sit it out.

Pawar has been meeting Shiv Sena and Congress leaders ever since the Maharashtra Assembly election results were announced last week.

Meanwhile, Shiv Sena continued to attack the BJP today. Sanjay Raut, Shiv Sena’s Rajya Sabha MP and editor of party mouthpiece Saamna, hit out at the BJP for threatening with President’s Rule in the state. “Is the President of India in your pocket?” Raut asked while addressing reporters, adding that the President’s Rule was imposed only after all options were exhausted.

He, however, was still hopeful of a 50:50 power sharing deal with the BJP. “Shiv Sena will stick to the coalition dharma till the end,” he said.

State BJP chief Chandrakant Patil, too, told reporters that the issue with Shiv Sena would be resolved soon. However, others in the BJP said the party might stake claim with the support of some Independent MLAs and woo rebels in other parties to help Fadnavis win the vote of confidence.

A new government has to be sworn in by November 9 when the term of the

Maharashtra Assembly comes to an end.

Back Sena, Cong MP writes to party chief
