‘Fake news’: Manish Sisodia on schools, colleges shut in Delhi till November 8

Chief Minister of Delhi Arvind Kejriwal and Deputy Chief Minister Manish Sisodia distribute mask to a school students to fight against pollution in New Delhi on November 1. Express photo by Praveen Khanna

Deputy Chief Minister Manish Sisodia Sunday warned people that a fake letter has been circulating with his signature that all educational institutions in New Delhi will be closed till November 8.

“Fake letter circulating on social media regarding school college closure till November 8. So far schools have been closed till November 5; any further decision shall be communicated through proper channels only,” he tweeted.

Fake letter circulating on social media regarding school college closure till November 8.

So far schools have been closed till November 5; any further decision shall be communicated through proper channels only. All are advised not to believe on such fake letters or news. — Manish Sisodia (@msisodia) November 3, 2019

Meanwhile, schools and colleges in the National Capital Region (NCR) will also remain closed till November 5.

“Transport vehicles like buses and minibuses, which a lot of schools use to ferry children, are a major contributor of PM 2.5 and PM 10. The movement of such vehicles in the city now could aggravate the situation,” District Magistrate B N Singh said in a written order.

“Hence, it is ordered that all schools up till Class 12 in Gautam Buddh Nagar will remain closed on November 4 and 5,” he said.

As the air quality level in New Delhi deteriorated to ‘severe-plus emergency‘ category on Sunday, the Chief Minister Arvind Kejriwal called on the Centre to take immediate steps to improve the situation and said his government will support it.

“Pollution has reached unbearable levels across N India. Del govt taken many steps. Delhiites hv made many sacrifices. Del suffering for no fault of theirs. Punjab CM also expressd concern. Centre shud take immediate steps 2 provide relief. V will support Centre in all initiatives,” Kejriwal tweeted.

At least 32 flights have been diverted from Delhi towards Jaipur, Amritsar, and Lucknow, news agency PTI reported. Air India also said that 12 of its flights have been diverted due to bad weather conditions.
