Q2 earnings, FII inflows among key factors that may guide D-Street this week

Stock Analysis – Know before investing Stock score of Ashok Leyland Ltd moved up by 1 in a month on a 10-point scale. Subscribe Now Exclusively for

Stock Analysis Stock score of Ashok Leyland Ltd is 4 on a scale of 10. View Stock Analysis »

Indian stock market rose for a sixth straight session on Friday on a good set of earnings numbers, progress in US-China trade talks and hopes of more reforms.In the coming week, traders will keep an eye on a number of quarterly results including India’s fifth most valued firm in India -- HDFC.The Regional Comprehensive Economic Partnership meet in Thailand will also be on the radar of the market participants. Apart from that they will also track developments on the trade talks and Brexit fronts.According to the buzz on Dalal Street , these factors may guide markets this week:Representatives from 16 nations will meet on Monday in Thailand to announce the result of their seven-year long negotiations on Regional Comprehensive Economic Partnership (RCEP). India is one of the parties to the negotiations. Analysts have warned that India joining the bloc could not go so well for the country. It runs the danger of seeing adverse impact on domestic producers, cautions a report from theThis week, traders will keep an eye on some big-ticket quarterly earnings. HDFC and Persistent will release their numbers on Monday, followed by Apollo Tyres,, Divi’s Lab, Gillette India, Jindal Steel, PNB,and Titan on Tuesday.Wednesday will see Indiabulls Housing Finance, Lupin and Tata Steel release their numbers. BPCL is scheduled to post numbers on Thursday followed by, M&M, MRF, Nestle India on Friday andon Saturday.Foreign Institutional Investors poured in a net Rs 10,696 crore in the equity market last week, data available with NDSL showed. Their bullish stance helped Sensex and Nifty close in the green for all trading sessions in the last week. Nifty closed with a weekly gain of 2.72 per cent and Sensex added 2.82 per cent. Traders will keep an eye on the further flow of the foreign investors this week.Apart from tracking the developments on US-China trade talks and Brexit, marketmen will also keep a watch on important numbers from the US and other major economies throughout the week. A host of European countries and the EU will release their PMI numbers on Monday. The US will come out with September factory orders growth numbers. Further in the week, the US will release Redbook data, Services PMI, crude and natural gas inventory levels.
