City bizmen oppose hike in minimum wages

Ludhiana: City businessmen are up in arms against the recent decision of the state government to hike minimum wages for different categories of workers in Punjab. According to city inc, the huge difference of minimum wages between Punjab and other neighbouring states will give a huge advantage to factories based in other states, as the cost of production of factories located in Punjab would rise significantly. The businessmen have also warned that if the gap of minimum wages — which in some cases is almost Rs3,000 per month — is not narrowed by the state government, it is very likely that a large number of factories from the state would shift their base to other states.

According to advocate Rajnish Bansal of Bansal & Associates, “A few days back, the state government had hiked minimum wages for unskilled labour to Rs8,776.83 from Rs8,451.95 per month. For semi-skilled labour, the new rates of wages had been set at Rs9,556.83 from Rs9,231.95, while for skilled labour, the rate was revised to Rs10,453.83 from Rs10,128.95.”

Condemning the hike, Upkar Singh Ahuja, president of Chamber of Industrial and Commercial Undertakings (CICU), “This is nothing less than a setback for the industry of Punjab, as already the minimum wages in Punjab are among the highest levels in the country, but this increase will now further increase the gap of cost of production of industries of Punjab with industries of other states, specially nearby states. If we compare the minimum wages of unskilled labour in Punjab, the new rate is Rs8,777, which is Rs3,000 higher than Rajasthan, where it is Rs5,850, and in Himachal Pradesh, it is Rs7,500. With such a huge difference, one can well imagine the cost advantage the industries based in those states are having over us. This is a very big challenge for industries of Punjab, which are already under a lot of stress, given problems like unprecedented recession, lack of funds, and increasing competition. It is up to the state government now to take notice of this problem and take corrective measures at the earliest, or else wait for Punjab’s industry to slip further into crisis.”

According to CICU general secretary Pankaj Sharma, “The increase in minimum wages in Punjab is not justified at all, and will prove to be a disaster for us. This will give further advantage to our competitors in other states who already have an edge over us in various aspects like low cost of electricity, low rate of rentals, and land ownership. We are totally clueless on what basis the government revised the rates, when everyone knows the present condition of industry in the state.”

According to Narinder Bhamra, president of Fasteners Manufacturers Association of India, “This is yet another decision imposed on us without studying the ongoing market conditions and probable impact on Punjab’s industry. The Punjab government often talks about level playing field for industry. Is this the way we will be on par with other states? With decisions like these, it is certain now that factories in the state will have no option other than to shift to other states, where not only is labour cheaper, but also available in abundance.”



Facebook Twitter Linkedin EMail
