Narendra Modi: India opts out of RCEP, PM Modi says concerns not addressed

India pulls out of RCEP, PM Modi says nation's concerns not addressed

NEW DELHI: India opted out of the Regional Comprehensive Economic Partnership (RCEP) on Monday, with PM Narendra Modi putting his foot down and saying the country’s concerns were not addressed.“Our farmers, traders, professionals and industries have stakes in such decisions. Equally important are workers and consumers, who make India a huge market and the third biggest economy in terms of purchasing power parity. When I measure the RCEP agreement with respect to the interests of all Indians, I do not get a positive answer. Therefore, neither the talisman of Gandhiji nor my own conscience permit me to join RCEP,” Modi said at the RCEP Summit in Thailand , seven years after negotiations started for formation of what could have been the world’s largest trading bloc.India’s “no” means the bloc will not become a reality. The outcome annoyed China — its ire evident in accusations in state-controlled media about India making lastminute demands — and other members of the proposed bloc who have been eyeing the Indian market.This is the second time since 2014 that the government has taken a tough stand on global trade issues. Soon after taking charge, the Modi administration had threatened to walk out of the WTO’s Bali package, which could have impacted the country’s food procurement programme. This time, the main concern was the threat of imports from China flooding the market.Indian negotiators said the terms on offer did not address its worry despite it being flagged repeatedly. Besides, there were elements in the trade package which could have impacted the government’s economic policy. For instance, RCEP would have forced the government to reduce import duties on several goods, including mobile phones, to 2014 levels, impacting ‘Make in India’. The Indian government also stood to lose around Rs 50,000-60,000 crore if it had agreed to the reduced duties.“Today, when we look around, we see during seven years of RCEP negotiations, many things, including the global economic and trade scenarios, have changed. We cannot overlook these changes. The present form of the RCEP agreement does not fully reflect the basic spirit and the agreed guiding principles of RCEP,” Modi said.There were also fears that the weak rules could have allowed Chinese goods to be routed via Vietnam or Thailand, while there was little to ensure that Beijing didn’t erect non-tariff barriers to block the entry of Indian medicines or rice. In their joint statement, the regional leaders acknowledged India’s concerns but kept the door open.“All RCEP participating countries will work together to resolve these outstanding issues in a mutually satisfactory way. India’s final decision will depend on satisfactory resolution of these issues,” the statement said. RCEP has always been an area of concern for Indian industry and farmers, and policymakers were reluctant to join negotiations during UPA-2. But as part of the Manmohan Singh government’s ‘Look East’ policy, India decided to join the talks, hoping it would take years for the deal to be thrashed out. In the process, it ended up annoying several countries, such as South Korea and Thailand, which wanted the agreement finalised without India as the Modi government too seemed to be pursuing a similar policy.
