Driver who tried to rescue Telangana Tehsildar who was set ablaze, also dies

Driver who tried to rescue Telangana Tehsildar who was set ablaze, also dies

Gurunatham, Tehsildar Vijaya Reddy’s driver is survived by an 8-month pregnant wife and 2-year-old son.

news Death

Less than a day after a Tehsildar Vijaya Reddy died in Telangana’s Abdullapurmet after being set ablaze, her driver, Gurunatham, also succumbed to his injuries on Tuesday morning. Gurunatham tried to rescue Vijaya at the time of the tragic incident, and according to local media reports, sustained 80% burns.

He was reportedly being treated at Apollo DRDO Hospitals in Kanchanbagh, Hyderabad. He is survived by an 8-month pregnant wife and 2-year-old son, according to Sakshi.

The Tehsildar was set ablaze and killed on Monday afternoon in her office by a man called K Suresh, allegedly over a land dispute. According to eyewitnesses, they heard a small explosion in the Tehsildar’s office, and then realised that a person had been set on fire and had collapsed right outside Vijaya Reddy’s chambers. Bystanders intervened, and put out the fire with the help of the blankets. It was only after this that they realised that the victim was the Tehsildar herself.

Vijaya Reddy is survived by her husband and two children — a 10-year-old daughter and a 5-year-old son, and was the first Tehsildar of Abdullahpurmpet after the office was opened around three years ago. A former government teacher, she resigned to pursue further studies and qualify as an MRO. She had also reportedly received an award for the best mandal revenue officer in 2018.



Tehsildar Vijaya Reddy and family

The explosion in her office was reportedly caused by fire coming in contact with an Air Conditioner duct. The police have collected forensic evidence from the office chambers.

A case of murder has been registered against the accused and the police said that they were investigating if anyone provoked Suresh to commit the crime. Suresh has also reportedly sustained 70% burns, and is critical.

An association of revenue officials called for protests across the state on Tuesday to demand severe punishment for the guilty. Employees also plan to boycott duties for three days as a mark of protest.
