Shiv Sena asks governor to invite it to form government

Agencies

New Delhi: Shiv Sena has asked the Maharashtra governor to invite it to form the next government, in its capacity as the second-largest party, if the largest continues to dither. Sena presented to the governor on Monday constitutional positions and precedents Rashtrapati Bhavan and Raj Bhavans have set when the secondlargest party was invited after the largest expressed disinterest or inability to form government after fractured verdicts.The Sena mouthpiece, meanwhile, signaled that it has had enough of Devendra Fadnavis by calling him an ‘outgoing chief minister’, forcing the CM to meet RSS chief Mohan Bhagwat, amid a push for involving Nitin Gadkari for firefighting.Sena leaders met the governor ahead of Congress-NCP delegation’s audience with him on Tuesday to urge him to expedite process of ministry formation as Maharashtra had several issues which needed the attention of an elected government. A day after the Pawar-Sonia meeting in Delhi, NCP also asked Sena to start the process of disengaging from BJP by pulling out of the Union Council of Ministers, a line of likely action indicated in Tuesday’s ET.According to a source, Sena’s message to the governor was conveyed when a party delegation met him on Monday around the time Sonia Gandhi and Sharad Pawar firmed up an action plan in Delhi. One of the precedents Sena cited was Venkatraman inviting the Janata Dal in 1989, after the Rajiv Gandhiled Congress declined the invitation to form a government despite being the largest party.“It’s first the duty of the governor to start inviting parties to explore government formation. Then will come the stage of parties that think they are in a position to form the government to stake claim. If a particular party is dithering, then the governor will have to invite the secondlargest party. That is what we conveyed to the honourable governor,” a source said.Senior Sena leader Sanjay Raut on Tuesday said staking claim “cannot be the monopoly of only one party” and that the next CM will be from the Sena as politics of Maharashtra was changing.“The decision on Maharashtra will be taken in Maharashtra, the CM will be from Shiv Sena… In our fight for justice, we will win,” he said. Hardening its stand against chief minister Devendra Fadnavis, Sena mouthpiece Saamana called him an ‘outgoing CM’ and asked him to quit the ring. “The outgoing CM, who came back to Maharashtra from polluted Delhi will have to take the next step forward to determine the further course of action,” the editorial said. Meanwhile, Congress’ tactical position to provide a cushion to a possible Sena-NCP arrangement by taking an anti-BJP position is meant to help it argue it ‘won’t back Sena’ just as it ‘won’t back BJP’s plan in the assembly’, sources said.
