Raj Thackeray meets Anna Hazare, tell him not to trust PM Narendra Modi and any of his promises

Raj Thackeray and Anna Hazare | Photo Credit: Twitter

Ahmednagar: Maharashtra Navnirman Sena (MNS) president Raj Thackeray on Monday held a meeting with anti-corruption crusader Anna Hazare, whose indefinite hunger strike entered the sixth day. Thackeray arrived at Ralegan-Siddhi earlier today with several MNS leaders.

Kisan Baburao alias Hazare (81) launched his fast in Ralegan-Siddhi on January 30 seeking the implementation of his three-point long-pending demands. The social activist seeks implementation of the MS Swaminathan Commission Report on the farmers, the appointment of Lokpal and setting up Lokayuktas in all the states.

Hazare and the MNS leader held a closed-door meeting at a room in the Yadav Baba temple premises for nearly 20 minutes.

During the meeting, Thackeray hailed the causes for which Hazare had been fasting. "I have told him not to put his life at risk for the undeserving hypocrites... It was because of Hazare that the Modi government could come to power," IANS quoted Thackeray as saying.

"On December 18, 2013, Narendra Modi had tweeted that Lokpal should be appointed. It's been five years but no Lokpal been appointed yet?...He (Anna Hazare) should not believe in any assurances made by (Prime Minister) Narendra Modi," Thackeray told the media after meeting Hazare.

The MNS leader said that he was surprised that even Delhi Chief Minister Arvind Kejriwal had neither visited Hazare nor made any enquiry regarding his health. "The entire country got to know Mr Kejriwal because of Anna's agitation. Now, he (Kejriwal) is in power and not showing concern towards Mr Anna's health," he said.

Read Also: Anti-corruption crusader Anna Hazare to return Padma Bhushan, says ‘purpose of award doesn’t exist anymore'

Hazare has lost more than five kg In the past few days, though his vital parameters were reported to be normal. Maharashtra Chief Minister Devendra Fadnavis has urged him to withdraw his agitation.

Read Also: Anna Hazare fast: Villagers protest against PMO's 'cold response'

On Sunday, the social activist had warned that if the Modi government did not fulfil its promises, he would return his Padma Bhushan - the third-highest civilian honour of the country.

"If this government does not fulfil its promises made to the country in the next few days, I will return my Padma Bhushan," he told news agency PTI last evening. "(The) Modi government has breached the faith of people," he said.

Meanwhile, Bharatiya Janata Party's ally Shiv Sena has too supported Hazare.
