Amarinder Singh Attends Kartarpur Corridor Official Song Launch Event

Punjab Chief Minister Captain Amarinder Singh, former Haryana Chief Minister BS Hooda and former Punjab Chief Minister Prakash Singh Badal attended the official song release event of the Kartarpur Corridor on November 6. The song release comes days before the official inauguration of the Kartarpur Corridor which will connect Dera Baba Nanak shrine in Punjab with Kartarpur Sahib Gurudwara in Pakistan. Haryana's deputy Chief Minister Dushyant Chautala was also present at the event.

'Pakistan has hidden agenda'

Pakistan on Tuesday released a song for the Kartarpur Corridor, however, the song stirred controversy as it featured pictures of three Khalistani separatist leaders. One of the pictures displayed in the video's background shows Jarnail Singh Bhindranwale who was a separatist and was killed during the Blue star operation in 1984. However, later Pakistan has released a different version of the video on Twitter. In the twitter version, the Pakistan government has omitted the last few seconds of the video where posters of the Khalistani leaders featured. Speaking to media, Captain Amarinder Singh said

"All this is what I have been warning about since day one, that Pakistan has a hidden agenda here," the Chief Minister said.

Prime Minister Narendra Modi will inaugurate the corridor on the Indian side and Pakistan Prime Minister Imran Khan will open the route on the Pakistan side. India and Pakistan signed an agreement on the modalities of operating the Kartarpur Sahib corridor. The inauguration will also mark the 550th Birth Anniversary of Sikh faith founder Guru Nanak Dev.

READ | Punjab CM asks Sikh devotees to visit Kartarpur

Pakistan imposes 20 dollar tax on visitors

Pakistan plans to impose a tax of 20 dollars on people visiting Kartarpur. India had expressed disappointment after Pakistan refused to waive USD 20 service charge on Indians visiting Kartarpur Sahib Gurdwara and urged Islamabad to reconsider its decision given the "religious and spiritual sentiments" of the pilgrims. The bookings for the Kartarpur Shrine started on November 1. Travellers will be informed via SMS and email, which will confirm their registration just 3 to 4 days in advance of the date of travel. A passport is also a necessity along with the ETA while using the Kartarpur Corridor.

READ | Kartarpur Corridor: Booking, how to apply and online registration

READ | Let him explain: Amarinder on Pak crediting Imran, Sidhu for Kartarpur
