As city gasps for air, more trouble for farmers

Ludhiana: As the government has started arresting farmers and issuing challans for stubble burning, various farmers’ unions have termed the step as injustice to them.

Bhartiya Kissan Union (BKU) president Balbir Singh Rajewal said during the hearing of the petition filed by an NGO in the Supreme Court on pollution in New Delhi, the court directed the state to provide support of Rs 100 per quintal to farmers who did not burn stubble. He said the court also took to task the chief secretary of Punjab for not providing machinery to farmers for crop residue management.

Rajewal said after the apex court summoned the chief secretary on the subject and held a videoconferencing with the deputy commissioners and asked them to check fields and register cases against those farmers who burnt stubble. He said farmers were provided with machinery and the BKU would fight for farmers.

The office-bearers of other farmers’ organisations said instead of implementing recommendations of the National Green Tribunal (NGT), and M S Swaminathan Commission report, the government was registering cases against farmers.

“We have strongly opposed such action by the government wherein they are registering cases against farmers. The National Green Tribunal (NGT) had asked the state government to arrange machinery for farmers with land holdings up to two acre for crop residue management and they had been asked to charge Rs 5,000 per acre as rent from farmers with 2 to 5 acre land holdings to manage stubble and sowing etc. However, the government did not implement those recommendations. We demanded from the government that farmers should be paid Rs 200 per quintal and we will manage stubble on our own and not burn it, but this has also not been done,” said Sudagar Ghudani, general secretary of BKU Ekta Ugrahan.

“Farmers are already committing suicide due to debt and now cases are being registered against them. They are not even implementing the M S Swaminathan Commission’s recommendations, including increasing the MSP accordingly,” he said.

A farmer in Raikot area said if the government paid them the minimum amount for transportation of stubble or get the same lifted from their fields, they would not burn it.

He said farmers did not want to suffer because of stubble burning and make others suffer in terms of health due to such practice, but they needed help and support for the government.



Facebook Twitter Linkedin EMail
