With Sena and BJP still squabbling, the state may come under President’s rule; Here are Salient features of Article 356

President’s rule

Article 356

Union government

No horse-trading, no poaching: Mohan Bhagwat tells Fadnavis to not form govt without Sena A senior BJP leader on the condition of anonymity said the party believes there is no question of staking a claim without the Shiv Sena on board. “The situation was different in 2014.

houses of Parliament

Governor Bhagat Singh Koshyari

President Ram Nath Kovind

‘Saamana’s acerbic attacks on BJP cost Sena the CM’s post’; Senior BJP leaders to meet Governor Koshyari today Senior BJP leaders to meet Governor Koshyari today; say they will wait for Sena till Friday and then let President’s rule come in.

With Sena and BJP still squabbling, the state may come under the rule of the Centre.With BJP and the Shiv Sena refusing to come on the same page regarding power-sharing and the deadline for government formation looming, the imposition ofin the state cannot be ruled out altogether.What is President’s rule? In the event of the failure of constitutional machinery in a state,of the Constitution, commonly called President’s rule, is imposed. As per this provision, the state will come under the direct control of the, and the Governor will head the proceedings, representing the President of India.Once President’s rule comes into effect, the elected state government will be temporarily dissolved, and the Governor, who is appointed by the government at the Centre, will replace the Chief Minister as the chief executive of the State.How long can it continue? The imposition of the President’s rule requires the sanction of both. If approved, it can go on for six months. However, the imposition cannot be extended for more than three years, and needs to be brought before the two houses every six months for approval.In this particular case, if the deadlock continues till November 8,can recommendto impose President’s rule in the state under Article 356 of the Constitution.The President on the advice of the Union cabinet may accept such recommendation and keep the state assembly under suspended animation. According to a constitutional expert, after a year of President’s rule, one needs a certificate from the Election Commission stating that it is in no position to hold free and fair elections, given the law-and-order situation in the state.In 2014, Maharashtra came under the President’s rule for a brief while just before the state elections when the NCP pulled out of the ruling coalition with the Congress.Article 356 has been imposed 125 times till now and has often been criticised for being a tool of the central government to thwart democratic processes in states.
