Built 3 yrs back, hosp waits for docs

Ludhiana: It’s been three years since the community health centre (CHC) came into existence in Subhash Nagar to cater to pregnant women of eight wards in the city, but the institution hasn’t got doctors and staff till date as no appointment has been made against the posts.

The hospital was constructed and completed during the SAD-BJP regime at a cost of Rs 5 crore, but is currently in a shambles in the absence of maintenance.

Residents from areas, which were kept in mind at the time of hospital’s construction, now either they go to the mother-child hospital in Sector 32, Chandigarh Road, or Ludhiana civil hospital.

This 30-bed hospital was aimed to provide medical aid to pregnant women in the areas falling under ward numbers 7, 9, 10, 11, 12, 13, 14 and 15 so that they need not rush to far-off hospitals. There was requirement of specialist doctors for patients as OPD was open for all types of patients. One operation theater was also there in the hospital, but there was no equipment available at the time.

Satinder Kaur, a resident of Subhash Nagar, said the building had been lying unattended and is full of dust. The windowpanes are lying broken, garbage is scattered on the premises, footpaths are broken and structure is also getting damaged gradually, she added.

Civic surgeon Dr Rajesh Bagga said, “The matter is in the knowledge of state government and we have written letters for appointment of staff and equipment in the hospital. As soon as the staff and requirement equipment will arrive, we will start it.” He said they are in process to start the hospital very soon.

SAD takes a dig at Cong govt

Going live on Facebook, SAD district president and former MLA from East constituency Ranjit Dhillon said, “The construction of this hospital was started in 2015 and it was handed over to the district health department after its completion in 2016. At that time approval was given for appointing staff in the hospital. In January 2017 we also started free dispensary in the premises.”

He said till date not even single doctor has been appointed in hospital and all the efforts has gone in vain as Congress government after taking over in Punjab has spoiled the projects started by previous government. Dhillon said they would protest in the coming days outside this hospital.



Facebook Twitter Linkedin EMail
