At next meet of ‘No money for terror’, India preps to corner Pak on terror

India will next year host the conference of the “No Money For Terror”, the ministerial-level grouping of 70 countries that focuses on countering terror financing, terror and radicalisation.

The group, set up in 2018, is a much smaller version of the Financial Action Task Force (FATF) that has a single-point agenda to crack down on terror financing.

Minister of State for Home Affairs, G Kishan Reddy, made the announcement at the ongoing 2nd ‘No Money For Terror’ Conference in Melbourne today.

India had sent a five-member delegation led by the junior home minister and includes YC Modi, Director General of the National Investigation Agency.

At the inaugural session, Reddy raised the issue of state support to terror groups. The minister said despite “the killing of Osama Bin Laden in 2011, several active affiliates of Al Qaeda still exist”. Reddy cautioned that despite the elimination of Abu Bakr Al Baghdadi — the chief of the Islamic State — it is unlikely that the terror group would “cease to survive”.

India has proposed a four-point resolution, which includes pushing for implementing the standards of the FATF without political interference. The resolution, in particular, is aimed at countries that have been trying to protect terror havens such as Pakistan.

Pakistan and China are members of the grouping.

India also wants the countries to invest heavily on counter-radicalisation and has proposed that “terrorism” be designated as the “the single biggest threat to peace, security and development” and speedy finalisation of a Comprehensive Convention on International Terrorism under the United Nations

The first “No Money for Terror” conference was held in France. One of the key resolutions adopted at the first conference to establish and strengthen, at the national level frameworks that would allow financial intelligence units, intelligence and investigation services, and judicial authorities, law enforcement agencies to gather and share information of the individuals, groups, undertakings and entities associated with terrorist groups, including foreign terrorist fighters.
