New Maps: Another Machination of India

History has avouched that India has always been or is flaunting its malevolent behavior towards Pakistan. Until now, it has left no stone unturned in becoming inimical to Pakistan. Although, a couple of wars have also been waged between the said countries. India has always measured the negative steps due to which it gets never ahead. Also, it has given invariably full vent to other countries besides Pakistan.

Recently a new treachery of India regarding maps has come in the open. The India’s home ministry has issued the new maps displaying the disputed Jammu and Kashmir and certain areas of Gilgit-Baltistan as Indian territories. What a fanciful moveof India is this! India-Occupied Kashmir (IOK) was internationalised by India per se when it went to UN in 1948 and since then Modi government has been claiming that the issue of Kashmir is an internal one. Why do they forget the issue was resolved by UN in favour of Kashmiri people?

The grave issue in the neck of Indian home ministry is that it has violated the relevant United Nations Security Council Resolution (UNSCR). The government of Pakistan has nixed the maps, a couple of days ago, denouncing them as incorrect, void and legally on shaky ground. Including Pakistan, rest of the world recognises the Kashmir issue as disputed. In simple terms, it is really a big slap in the face of home ministry of India.

To me, the garbled practice of developing a new map is inexplicable as to why India does this kind of heinous malpractice. But the statement made by the Foreign Office’s spokesperson has unriddled this intrigue. It goes by saying, India can never change the disputed status of Jammu and Kashmir as approved by the United Nations (UNs). The statement deciphers the malevolent behavior of India to take some aforesaid territories under its possession, but their idle plots arein vain. India-held Jammu and Kashmiri people are exercising their due rights as per UNSCR and Pakistan would always support their legitimate efforts, said FO spokesperson. This is what rubs the salt over what India does behind the scene.

On the other hand, Chairman Kashmir Committee Syed Fakhar Imam has come on Narendra Modi like a ton of bricks condemning that he (Modi) was going against their own constitution on Kashmir issue as making the territories destitute of their special status. The Jammu and Kashmir territory was disputed some 72 years ago and India is yet trying to take it under its own possession. Bah! Pakistan will always be/is poised to support incessantly the people of Kashmir till they attain the right to self-determination.

On the other hand, Chairman Kashmir Committee Syed Fakhar Imam has come on Narendra Modi like a ton of bricks condemning that he (Modi) was going against their own constitution on Kashmir issue as making the territories destitute of their special status

Kashmiri people have lost a lot on the hands of blatant Indian forces. Over 100,000 Kashmiris have lasted their breath in making each and every possible endeavour on their independence. Also, Indian forces have hitherto made away with youth over 1.3 million in held Kashmir and whither they are kept hidden is unknown so far. Thus, they – Kashmiris – have been fighting for their right to self-determination that’s exemplary and Pakistan is supporting them in achieving their goals.

Indeed, Indian movies are famous throughout the globe but this kind of machinations India is evolving is palpably coming out in the open to disperse the hatred for them. It seems, drama is actually being played by them which is being watched widely all around the world. Given that, Kashmir is the jugular vein of Pakistan and all and sundry knows what Quaid-e-Azam had said regarding Kashmir and Pakistan. He had said; Pakistan is incomplete without Kashmir. Modi has multiple times threatened Pakistan as to not providing it with water – to Pakistan is a big threat – that indubitably needs Pakistan to be cautious.

India can never rupture the country of Pakistan if it (Pak) works seriously on its weaknesses to overcome. Whatever the tactics India adopts to threat Pakistan necessarily be contended with by all accounts.

The writer is member of Editorial Board of a Russian Research Journal; “Bulletin of Science and Practice”. He can be contacted at rameezalimahesar @gmail.com
