Maharashtra: Congress, NCP in a huddle at Sharad Pawar's residence

Sonia Gandhi and Sharad Pawar (File photo) | Photo Credit: PTI

Mumbai: Congress and NCP leaders held a meeting at Sharad Pawar's residence amid an ongoing tussle between ally partners BJP and Shiv Sena over government power-sharing in Maharashtra. The spat between 'Maha Yuti' alliance partners turned ugly after Maharashtra caretaker CM Devendra Fadnavis and Sena chief traded barbs Friday evening.

Uddhav Thackeray tore into BJP Friday evening after caretaker CM Devendra Fadnavis held a press conference. Rebutting Fadnavis's accusation that Shiv Sena did not reach out to the BJP for consultations to and instead held talks with NCP, Sena chief threatened to "withdraw all MLAs from the alliance" and demanded an apology for same.

Thackeray rubbished allegations that he met leaders of NCP and Congress instead of the BJP to hold discussions for formation of government in Maharashtra. He also attacked the BJP government at Centre on several fronts including promised loan waivers to Maharashtra and construction of Ram temple in Ayodhya.

Devendra Fadnavis and other Maharashtra ministers tendered their resignations to Governor Bhagat Singh Koshyari on Friday.

Maharashtra CM clarified there was no agreement with Shiv Sena on sharing the position of chief minister for 2.5 years. Fadnavis said Shiv Sena had already made up its mind about forming the government without BJP when it declared that "all options for forming the government were open" on the day of Assembly poll results itself.

Fadnavis will be caretaker Chief Minister of Maharashtra till the time a new government is formed.

Shiv Sena is not willing to settle for anything less than equal share in Cabinet portfolios and the Chief Minster's post for 2.5 years. Sena is putting all its weight behind its demand of making Aaditya Thackeray, who won from Worli seat in Mumbai, as the next chief minister of Maharashtra.

BJP has emerged as the single largest party in Maharashtra Assembly elections by winning 105 seats while the Shiv Sena got 56 seats in 288-member Vidhan Sabha.

Maharashtra government formation: UPDATES

8.26 pm: Posters come up near Uddhav Thackeray's Mumbai residence Matoshree featuring Aaditya. "In some days, I the grandson of Balasaheb Thackeray will take an oath with God as my witness..." the text on the poster read in Marathi.

Maharashtra: Poster seen outside Matoshree (Thackeray residence), in Mumbai. pic.twitter.com/mifMSuc0ne — ANI (@ANI) November 8, 2019

7.43 pm: Shortly after Uddhav Thackeray tore into Shiv Sena ally BJP in a press conference on Friday, Times Now has learnt that Nationalist Congress Party (NCP) and Congress leaders held a meeting at Sharad Pawar's residence.

6.47 pm: Slamming Fadnavis's comments that Shiv Sena did not reach out to the BJP for consultations to form the government and instead held talks with NCP, Sena chief threatened to "withdraw all MLAs from the alliance".

6.45 pm: "We had never closed the doors for discussion, they(BJP) lied to us so we did not talk to them. We have not yet held talks with the NCP," Thackeray said.

6.41 pm: "Appreciate PM on taking up the clean Ganga initiative but, BJP has not been able to clean its own wrongdoings," Thackeray said.

6.41 pm: "We have seen how BJP has formed government in several parts on the country, including Karnataka by horse-trading MLAs," Thackeray said.

6.36 pm: Attacking the BJP-led government at the Centre, Thackeray accused it of having no credibility. "Tomorrow you will impose Article 370, who can trust you" he said adding if there is "favourable" verdict then the government cannot claim any credit for it.

6.33 pm: "PM Modi had called me his younger brother but the comments made today do not show the same. We do not need a certificate from the BJP on whether we are speaking truth or lies," Thackeray said in the press conference held Friday.

6.30 pm: "Both RSS and BJP had made certain promises on Ram Mandir in their manifesto, none of which has been fulfilled," Shiv Sena chief said.

6.22 pm: "We were clear to BJP that we are not fighting in this alliance for deputy chief minister post", Shiv Sena chief Uddhav Thackeray said.

6.16 pm: Addressing a press conference shortly after Devendra Fadnavis slammed Shiv Sena after tendering his resignation, Shiv Sena chief Uddhav Thackeray said we criticised the government even when we were in alliance with BJP and that's why people liked us.

5.26 pm: Uddhav Thackery will address a press conference at 6 pm.

5.17 pm: Responding to Fadnavis's comments, Shiv Sena veteran Sanjay Raut said it is inappropriate to make such comments against a nationalist party like Shiv Sena. He also refuted statements about Shiv Sena making controversial comments against PM Modi and Amit Shah.

5.13 pm: "I have a very close relationship with Uddhav ji Thackeray and it will continue, I called him up many times but he has not responded yet," said the caretaker Chief Minister of Maharashtra.

5.08 pm: "Balasaheb Thackeray is respected by all of us, infact we even never said anything against Uddhav ji Thackeray, but in past 5 years and especially last 10 days the kind of statements which were made against our top leadership including Modi ji, were not tolerable," Fadnavis said.

5.05 pm: "Unfortunately, day when results came, Uddhav ji said all options open for government formation are open.That was shocking for us as people had given the mandate for alliance and in such circumstances, it was a big question for us that why he said all options are open for him," Fadnavis said.

5.02 pm: I again want to make it clear that it was never decided that for 2.5 years each the CM post will be shared. There was never a decision on this issue. Even Amit Shah ji and Nitin Gadkari ji said this was never decided

4.57 pm: Fadnavis said the Governor has asked him to officiate until a new government is formed in Maharashtra.

4.47 pm: Shiv Sena does not come to us for consultations and instead goes to NCP and Congress for the same. It looks like they have already made up their mind to go the other way, Fadnavis said.

4.46 pm: In a metropolitan city like Mumbai, the amount of infrastructural work that we have been able to do is path-breaking, Fadnavis said in a press conference after tendering his resignation.

4.45 pm: "Full majority was given to our pre-poll alliance by the people of Maharashtra and we (BJP) emerged as the single-largest party. Our 'strike-rate' at 70 percent was better than last time (2014)," Fadnavis said.

4.41 pm: After tendering his resignation to Maharashtra Governor, Fadnavis said it was accepted by Koshyari. He said in the last five years his government worked hard in areas such as Railways.

4:25 pm: Maharashtra Chief Minister Devendra Fadnavis and other state ministers have just met Governor Bhagat Singh Koshyari at Raj Bhawan and handed over their resignations. Today is the last day of incumbent Maharashtra Assembly.

4:19 pm: Shiv Sena to lodge its MLAs at Hotel Retreat in Madh, Malad West till November 15. Party has written to Mumbai Police Commissioner requesting for security arrangements.

3:20 pm: “This is also affecting the economy. We must quickly find a resolution,” said Sharad Pawar and indicated that polls might be around the corner after six months of President Rule in the state.

3:10 pm: BJP and Shiv Sena have the mandate so it is their responsibility to form the government in the state, said NCP chief Sharad Pawar. He further added that pushing Maharashtra to President Rule is not acceptable and people’s mandate must be respected.

2:25 pm: Meanwhile, there are reports that Shiv Sena MLAs, who were staying at Hotel Rangsharda in Sharda, are being moved to a resort in Madh Island.

2:20 pm: Congress leader Milind Deora has also called reports of horse-trading in Maharashtra as distrubing. "The news of horse-trading in Maharashtra is disturbing & unacceptable. This deadlock must end. Maharashtra has voted in favour of BJP-Shivsena. They should respect the peoples’ mandate & not shirk their responsibility for petty political gains. Govern first. Fight later!" Deora tweeted.

2:15 pm: The BJP has refuted allegations of attempted poaching in Maharashtra. "Congress and NCP have made allegations of horse trading against us. They should prove this charge within 48 hours or apologise to the people of Maharashtra," BJP leader Sudhir Mungantiwar said.

1:30 pm: Union Minister Nitin Gadkari has issued a clarification on his Mumbai visit saying he won’t be meeting any politician. His statement comes after media reports suggested that he would meet Shiv Sena chief Uddhav Thackeray at his residence Matoshree.

12:49 pm: NCP chief spokesperson Nawab Malik also said the people of Maharashtra will not tolerate this "insult" of the state and said that history shows the state doesn't bow before the "throne of Delhi".

12:47 pm: With government formation not happening in Maharashtra yet, the NCP has accused the BJP of pushing the state towards President's rule so that it can be run through Prime Minister Narendra Modi and the NDA constituent's chief Amit Shah.

12:39 pm: "There were reports that some Congress MLAs were approached by BJP leaders with money. Yesterday one or two of our MLAs were offered around Rs 25 crore. We will do our best to stop the horse-trading pattern that started in Karnataka," said Nitin Raut, Maharashtra Congress leader.

12:30 pm: Shiv Sena leader Sanjay Raut has said that Maharashtra Chief Minister Devendra Fadnavis should resign as the term of existing assembly is ending.

11:45 am: "We have not moved our MLAs anywhere, all our MLAs are at their locations. If some of our MLAs have gone to any place it might be a personal visit," said Congress leader Vijay Wadettiwar.

10:49 am: Yesterday, the BJP send Shiv Pratishthan Hindustan chief Manohar Bhide to Matoshree. The Hindutva leader waited to meet the Sena chief but was told that he was not available. Bhide has been acknowledged as a Guru of both Prime Minister Narendra Modi and Chief Minister Devendra Fadnavis.

10:40 am: Union Minister Nitin Gadkari is likely to meet Uddhav Thackeray in the afternoon. Shiv Sena's Sanjay Raut had earlier said that the Union Minister is welcome to Matoshree.

10:30 am: Shiv Sena chief Uddhav Thackeray is likely to address the media at 12 pm today.

10:10 am: “All Congress MLAs are together. No MLA will break away from the party. MLAs will follow what party high command says. We'll not allow BJP to form the government in the state. NCP is our ally, they are with us. People have voted for us to save Maharashtra,” said Maharashtra Congress leader Husain Dalwai.

9:55 am: In another stern warning to the BJP, Shiv Sena has said that President Rule is against the mandate. Addressing a press conference, Rajya Sabha MP Sanjay Raut further challenged the BJP to prove majority.

9:50 am: The Congress has shifted all its MLAs to Jaipur, Rajasthan amid reports of poaching. According to media reports, few MLAs have been offered money.

9:15 am: According to a media report, Shiv Sena will take action if BJP legislature party leader Devendra Fadnavis stakes claim to form the government without resolving the issues. The BJP delegation had met Governor Bhagat Singh Koshyari but decided not to stake claim to form the government.

8:45 am: An article in Shiv Sena mouthpiece Saamana quoted party supremo Uddhav Thackeray as saying that the BJP should call him only if it is ready to give the chief minister's post for 2.5 years. Addressing a press conference yesterday, Sanjay Raut asserted that the next CM of Maharashtra would be from his party only.

8:37 am: Shiv Sena leader and Worli MLA Aaditya Thackeray met newly-elected party MLAs at Hotel Rangsharda in the midnight on Friday. The legislators, who are from Mumbai and other parts of Maharashtra, are expected to be at the hotel for the next two-three days.

8:30 am: Yesterday, the Shiv Sena had accused ally Bharatiya Janata Party of "pushing the state towards President's Rule". Addressing a press conference yesterday, party Rajya Sabha MP Sanjay Raut had said that by not starting the process to form the government, the BJP is now allowing other options. He further termed it as an insult to the people of Maharashtra.

“The times have changed. After you are out of power, the politics of 'Saam, Daam, Dand and Bhed' will not work,” he had said.
