Aatish wasn’t targeted till Time article: Tavleen

Thank you for this reminder. Aatish’s mother has also always been an Indian citizen. And, his right to live here wa… https://t.co/x3IUULhkvD — Tavleen Singh (@tavleen_singh) 1573173962000

It is painful to see an official spokesperson of our government making a false claim that is so easily disproved. I… https://t.co/6SYcu4SKAW — Shashi Tharoor (@ShashiTharoor) 1573151627000

Aatish #Taseer's case is where a man chose not to disclose the name of his father. Government forms over the years… https://t.co/8PNfuEIjl8 — Abhishek Singhvi (@DrAMSinghvi) 1573200058000

NEW DELHI: Columnist Tavleen Singh , whose son Aatish Taseer is at the centre of a storm following revocation of his Overseas Citizen of India (OCI) card, strongly defended him on Friday."Aatish’s mother has also always been an Indian citizen. And, his right to live here was never questioned until he wrote an article that the Home Minister did not like," she tweeted.Responding to a tweet that nobody had been more critical of Sonia Gandhi than her but the Congress never felt it necessary to carry out punitive reprisals, she wrote, "Just to say that Sonia Gandhi took her revenge on me in her fashion. But, it is true that she never tried to harm my son."The controversy around the revocation of Aatish Taseer's OCI card refused to die down, with several Opposition politicians, social scientists and human rights organisations criticising the Centre's decision.Aatish is the son of Tavleen Singh and Pakistani politician Salman Taseer, who was assassinated in 2011 for speaking out against the country's blasphemy laws. Reports that the Centre had revoked Aatish’s OCI card for a Time magazine article critical of Prime Minister Narendra Modi (titled ‘Divider in Chief ’) were countered by the home ministry in a tweet late on Thursday. The ministry said that Aatish had concealed the fact that his late father was of Pakistani origin in his PIO application.Aatish himself wrote a piece titled ‘I am an Indian. Why Is the Government sending Me Into Exile?’ on Friday, which was pulished on Time's website. “India is my country. The relationship is so instinctive that, like an unwritten constitution, I had never before felt it necessary to articulate it… With my grandmother turning ninety next year – and my mother seventy — the government has cut me off from my country and family," he wrote."I was born in Britain and have British citizenship, but since the age of two I had lived and grown up in India, with my Indian mother. She had raised me on her own in Delhi and was always my sole legal guardian, and the only parent I knew for most of my life. It was why I had always been viewed as Indian in India and why I had been granted an OCI... at no time was my legal status ever questioned or challenged by the government until this September...I had expected a reprisal, but not a severing... it is hard not to feel, given the timing, that I was being punished for what I had written," he added.According to Aatish, he was warned by the Indian Consul General in September that he may now not even get a standard tourist visa for India as he is "accused of defrauding the government"."As a journalist I have been in many fearful places in my life – from interrogations in Iran to questioning by the mukhabarat in Assad’s Syria – but this was the first time I had thought of India in that way... Out of a habit of mind, I clung to the idea of India as a liberal democracy, the world’s largest. But entering the US in September, I was aware for the first time that I was no longer merely an immigrant...I was an exile," he wrote.Other comments too poured in. Congress MP Shashi Tharoor @ShashiTharoor tweeted, “It is painful to see an official spokesperson of our government making a false claim that is so easily disproved. It is even more painful that in our democracy such things happen… Is our Govt so weak that it feels threatened by a journalist?”Tavleen, replying to Tharoor, wrote, “And, worrying to see that they do not check their own records or they may have noticed my application for him to live in India when I brought him here aged two.”“A petty and vindictive act of a petty and vindictive government,” historian Ramachandra Guha wrote.Amnesty deputy South Asia director Omar Waraich, while referring to Aatish’s parentage wrote, “Concealed the fact? @AatishTaseer wrote a book on his background. The Modi government strips one of the subcontinent’s best known writers of his nationality because it can’t stand criticism. Notice also how they mention Aatish’s middle name (Ali) to try and out him as a Muslim.”The Committee to Protect Journalists, a nonprofit organization that works for press freedom, also put out a statement supporting Taseer. On it’s verified handle @pressfreedom, the committee while quoting its Asia program coordinator, wrote, “Targeting a journalist’s immigration status after the publication of a critical article shows that the @BJP4India is intolerant of criticism and freedom of the press.”Pen America, a network of organisations that protects "free expression in the US and worldwide" also issued a statement. Karin Deutsch Karlekar, director of Free Expression at Risk Programs said, “Harassing critical writers and journalists not just in India but globally is a disturbing new low for Modi’s government that’s already put Indian democracy on its heels. Revoking Aatish Taseer’s citizenship document — which would in effect also ban him from visiting his childhood home and seeing his mother and grandmother — is a cruelly personal and vindictive way to punish a journalist for their critical coverage. We call on the Indian government to cease their judicial harassment of Taseer immediately and allow him to keep his OCI card.”Congress politician Abhishek Singhvi tweeted "#Taseer's case is where a man chose not to disclose the name of his father. Government forms over the years have evolved".
