Ayodhya verdict: We respect Supreme Court's verdict, says Congress

Following a CWC meeting before the Ayodhya land dispute case, Congress has said the party is in favour of the construction of Ram Temple in Ayodhya.

Randeep Surjewala, Congress' spokesperson said that there's no need to give credit to the BJP. "I think this matter is special to someone. No need to give credit to the party. The doors are closed forever for BJP's politics, Ram is a symbol of decorum. Not the enjoyment of politics and power," he said during a press conference.

"The land was acquired by the Congress in 1993, I want to remind you", he added.

The party also appealed to all the concerned parties and communities to abide by the secular values and spirit of fraternity enshrined in our Constitution and to maintain peace and harmony.

"It is the responsibility of each one of us to reaffirm our tradition of mutual respect and unity among all that has defined our society through the ages," he added.

The Congress had consistently stated that it wants everyone to abide by the SC verdict. It had also warned its party leaders against making any incendiary statements ahead of the verdict.

"Contrary views are emerging within the party. The leaders are desperate about the political fallout. But party managers want the least damage this time. So a resolution may come to give clarity to all congressmen," a party leader had said.

In a 5-0 unanimous decision, the Supreme Court on Saturday ruled that the disputed 2.77 acre land in Ayodhya will go to Hindus while Muslims will be given a 5-acre plot at an alternate location in the city for construction of the mosque.

The apex court, however, handed over the land to the government to take measures for maintaining peace and harmony and law and order. The government will create a Board of Trust and formulate a scheme within 3 months.

The five-judge bench was hearing appeals challenging the 2010 Allahabad High Court verdict, which ordered equal division of the 2.77-acre of disputed land in Ayodhya among the Sunni Waqf Board, the Nirmohi Akhara and the Ram Lalla.

Prime Minister Narendra Modi on Friday appealed for calm ahead of the Supreme Court verdict on Ayodhya, saying that whatever judgment the country's top court gives will not be anyone's victory or loss.
