Yes, BJP used me in 2014: Anna Hazare

uttara@tribuneindia.com

Ahmednagar (Maharashtra), February 4

Fasting activist Kisan Babural alias Anna Hazare said on Monday that he was "used by the Bharatiya Janata Party (BJP)" to win the 2014 Lok Sabha elections.

"Yes. The BJP used me in 2014. Everybody knows that it was my agitation for Lokpal that catapulted the BJP and also the Aam Aadmi Party (AAP) to power. Now I have lost all regards for them," Hazare told the media in his Ralegan-Siddhi village.

He said the government led by Prime Minister Narendra Modi "is only misleading the people of the country and leading the country to autocracy" and added that the BJP-led Maharashtra government was speaking "lies" over the past four years.

"For how long will the lies continue? This government has let down the people of the country. The state government's claims that 90 per cent of my demands have been conceded are also false," the 81-year old said.

He rued that now the very same people who benefitted from his agitations in 2011 and 2014 had turned their backs on his demands and nothing had been done to implement them in the past five years.

"They keep saying that central and state government ministers will come and discuss the issues with me. But I say no to them as it would confuse the people... (Let) them take firm decisions and give me everything in writing as I have lost faith in their assurances."

To a question, Hazare said his former associate Arvind Kejriwal -- now the Delhi Chief Minister -- was welcome to join his current agitation. "But I will not permit him to share the dais with me." Hazare's strong remarks came on the sixth day of his indefinite hunger strike and a day after he threatened to return his Padma Bhushan -- India's third highest civilian honour -- if his demands were not conceded by the government soon.

Last weekend, Nationalist Congress Party spokesperson Nawab Malik called Hazare an "RSS and Sangh Parivar agent". Hours later, senior NCP leader and former Deputy Chief Minister Ajit Pawar apologised for the remarks.

Amid rising concern over his frail health, Hazare said: "Don't worry. I am fine. The Almighty is with me. Nothing will happen to me for another five days." -- IANS

Sena seeks Modi's intervention to save Anna's life

MUMBAI: The Shiv Sena on Monday demanded Prime Minister Narendra Modi's government intervention in social activist Anna Hazare’s indefinite hunger strike for the appointment of the Lokpal.

With Hazare's hunger strike entering the sixth day on Monday, Shiv Sena’s mouthpiece Saamna suggested that time was running out for the veteran Gandhian. "First you have to save Anna's life and then other things can be thought of later," Saamna said in an editorial on Monday.



Hitting out at the central government's silence on the issue, Saamna wondered whether Prime Minister Modi’s government was interested in Hazare. "If the government wants Anna to lose his life in this battle, it is a sign of the state's culture becoming sicker," the write-up said.



The Shiv Sena mouthpiece also used the occasion to launch a personal attack on the prime minister.



"Anna is called stubborn. It is a hallmark of selfless people. Prime Minister Narendra Modi has a similar character as well, but he is called a great leader," Saamna said.



The newspaper also accused the government of "managing the media" so that there was little coverage of Hazare's fast. "If Anna's agitation spreads across the country like it did last time, there would be chaos across the country," it noted.



Meanwhile Maharashtra Navnirman Sena leader Raj Thackeray and water conservation activist Rajendra Singh met Hazare at his village, Ralegan Siddhi, where he is on fast.



Extending support for his agitation for a strong Lokpal, Thackeray suggested that Hazare abandon his fast and embark on a tour across Maharashtra to bring down the BJP government.



Singh warned Hazare that he would meet the same fate as activist GD Agarwal, who died last October after fasting for 111 days while demanding a cleaner Ganga. — TNS


