Felt great sense of reassurance: Sonia Gandhi thanks SPG for protecting her family for 28 years

Sonia Gandhi | Photo Credit: PTI

Key Highlights Gandhis security cover was downgraded from SPG to Z+ security Sonia Gandhi thanked the force for protecting her and her family for 28 years BJP leadership was "blinded by personal hatred and political vendetta", Congress had said after the decision

New Delhi: A day after the SPG security cover of Gandhis was withdrawn, party interim chief Sonia Gandhi, on Saturday, penned an emotional letter, thanking the force for protecting her and her family with "dedication, discretion and personal care" for 28 years.

In the letter to SPG Director Arun Kumar Sinha, Gandhi termed the Special Protection Group (SPG) an "outstanding" force and expressed her deep appreciation and gratitude to it.

Sonia Gandhi, her son Rahul and daughter Priyanka were stripped of the elite SPG security cover on Friday, 28 years after the elite force's continuous deployment. The SPG cover was replaced by the 'Z-plus' security of the CRPF.

"Ever since our security was put in the hands of the SPG, my family and I have felt a great sense of reassurance and confidence that we are in the best possible hands. Every day, for the last 28 years, we have experienced the unfailing high professionalism, dedication to duty and sincerity with which the SPG protect us," she said in her letter.

She further said that SPG is an outstanding force and its members imbued with courage and patriotism in every task assigned to them.

"On behalf of my whole family, I would like to express our deep appreciation and gratitude to the SPG for looking after our security and wellbeing with such dedication, discretion and personal care," she wrote in the letter.

Earlier, Rahul had also thanked the SPG for providing protection to him and his family for so many years.

The decision to withdraw SPG cover given to the family of former prime minister Rajiv Gandhi, who was assassinated by LTTE terrorists on May 21, 1991, was taken after a detailed security assessment, a senior home ministry official said.

The Congress also hit out at the Centre for the decision and alleged that by withdrawing their SPG cover the government was endangering the lives of Sonia, Rahul and Priyanka. It also said that the decision showed that the BJP leadership was "blinded by personal hatred and political vendetta".

Stepping up its attack, the party reminded the Modi government that a similar mistake was committed in case of former prime minister Rajiv Gandhi, who was assassinated, and that it was Atal Bihari Vajpayee who amended the law to give SPG security to Gandhi family members.
