Kolkata Police go hi-tech, to get body cameras to record crime scene and statements

A senior police officer said that procuring the cameras is part of police modernisation programme that is on par with global standards. | Photo Credit: Representative Image

Key Highlights Kolkata Police cops to get body cameras to record crime scenes Cameras to help senior officials monitor raids and interrogation Police will procure 100 body cameras initially

Kolkata: In a move that could revolutionise policing in the West Bengal capital, the detective department of the Kolkata Police is all set to procure body cameras for use in conducting the raids and recording the crime scenes.

The Lal Bazar police is expected to procure around 100 body cameras for its personnel posted in the detective branch.

According to a report, the cameras will be utilised to conduct raids, record witnesses and suspects. The cameras will also help senior police officials to monitor the raids without actually going to the spot.

Two years back, the Kolkata traffic police personnel were given body cameras to monitor the traffic situation on the ground.

A senior police officer said that procuring the cameras is part of the police modernisation programme that is on par with global standards.

Officials say the body cameras will not only help in recording the raids but will also help in recording the statements of witnesses and suspects in the case leading to better analysis and investigation. The recording would be invaluable in any investigation as the police use 3D technology in mapping the crime scenes.

"These cameras would be of immense use in cases like homicide, anti-robbery and anti-snatching. This will also help the department in assessing how a particular officer is probing the case, " said a police officer. Other police officers believe the technology will help in curbing the "excesses" of the police in some cases.

"We hear allegations of police excesses during raids at places like bars, illegal call centres. With body cameras in place, we would be able to find the truth," said another officer.

The Kolkata Police will soon impart training to the cops of the detective branch to operate the cameras. The policemen have been ordered to fix the cameras on their uniform during the duty and switch it every time they are conducting a raid or interrogating a person.

In a similar move, the Mumbai Police got its much-awaited hi-tech robot known as Mini Remotely Operated Vehicle (MROV), Rover Mark. This robot will be used for bomb disposal, aiming to minimise the human loss in case of explosions. Also, it is a significant part of the 'police modernisation plan' after the 26/11 terror attack.

The machine is an addition to the force, costing approximately Rs 84 lakh. The robot is built by SDS (Security Defence System) in India and three of such robots, which weigh around 100 kg, are now in use after extensive tests conducted in the past few months.
