Siddaramaiah-DK Shivakumar rift out in the open

Siddaramaiah

DK Shivakumar

KPCC president

The meeting remained incomplete. We will meet again on Wednesday. There are no differences of opinion on selection of candidates –Dinesh Gundurao, KPCC president

Dinesh Gundurao

Bengaluru

Meeting to select candidates for bypolls had to be stopped abruptly after the duo got into a disagreement with each other’s choicesThe cold war between Congress leadersandcame to a flash point at a meeting to select candidates for the December 5 Assembly byelections.This was the first time the two were coming face to face in a party forum after Shivakumar came out was out on bail from Tihar jail in a money laundering case.Siddaramaiah was already successful in electing eight of his own candidates to the December 5 bye-elections. Making Hebbal MLA B Suresh’s wife Padmavathi a party candidate against disqualified MLA MTB Nagaraj is said to have upset Shivakumar. The former minister had vowed on the floor of the Assembly to defeat disqualified Congress MLA Nagaraj in Hoskote in the byelections. The meeting convened byDinesh Gundurao at the KPCC office on Monday witnessed an exchange of words between Siddaramaiah and Shivakumar as the latter was not in favour of giving tickets to Lakkan Jharkiholi, the youngest brother of disqualified MLA Ramesh Jharkiholi. In Gokak, Siddaramaiah was inclined to field Lakkan against Ramesh(he hopes to contest on a BJP ticket if the Supreme Court allow this).It is said that Shivakumar has some differences with Ramesh Jharkikholi and is against giving tickets to any members of Jharkiholi family. He has accused them of indulging in backstabbing and blackmailing. Shivakumar is said to have preferred giving tickets to rival BJP candidates, who had lost against the Congress candidates in the 2018 Assembly polls. For Gokak, Shivakumar is said to have lobbied hard for defeated BJP candidate Ashok Poojary, who lost to Ramesh Jharkiholi, while in Kagawad. He asked for a ticket to BJP candidate Raju Kage against Shreemant Patil. Kage has said that he has resigned from the BJP and will join the Congress. He even met Siddaramaiah on Monday. When there was no point of agreement between Siddaramaih and Shivakumar, the latter is said to have asked the former to lead the party all by himself and win elections. As things got grim, others pacified them before abruptly adjourning the meeting.Later, KPCC presidenttold reporters that the meeting remained incomplete and they will meet again on Wednesday. He denied any differences of opinion on selection of candidates.Siddaramaiah is said to be not too happy with Congress president Sonia Gandhi visiting Shivakumar in jail and the subsequent importance given to him including the grand reception from the airport to the party headquarters inIt is said that a video clip of Siddaramaiah expressing dissent over Shivakumar holding a JD(S) flag at the reception was leaked with the purpose to embarrass the former minister and showcase his ties with the JD(S). To that, Shivakumar’s followers said the former CM was envious of the importance their leader was getting. The Kanakapura leader, however, had sarcastically remarked that Siddaramaiah loved him a lot and would never speak ill about him.A recent visit by Shivakumar to Siddaramaiah’s home district Mysuru is seen as an effort by the Vokkaliga leader to prove a point that he is capable of upsetting the senior leader. Siddramaiah, on his part, had downplayed the visit.
