Charity comm’s lens on NGOs, trusts in Maval

The body issues inquiry orders after ACB forwards complaints made by locals against people posing as human rights and RTI activists



The charity commissioner of Pune has issued inquiry in the functioning of trusts and organisations in Maval tehsil that form human rights committees, which are often mistaken as government bodies by unsuspecting citizens, and file petitions under Right to Information (RTI) Act and allegedly intimidate and extort money from people.



The investigation has been initiated based on unknown complaints against Akhil Maharashtra Mahiti Adhikar Samiti, an organisation registered with the charity commission, and other such bodies, received by the Anti-Corruption Bureau (ACB) of Pune. ACB received several complaints from residents of Maval, claiming harassment and blackmail by nonprofit bodies under the name of human rights and RTI petitions, targeting allegedly both private and government officials.



It was after ACB wrote to the charity commissioner, demanding an investigation to probe into the complaints, that the body decided to go ahead with the move.



The letter extended by ACB states, “There are group and individuals in Maval tehsil who are targeting officials and citizens, making it difficult for them to carry on with their work. Posed as RTI activists and human rights committees, they try to gain monetary benefit out of their illegal activities. According to the complaints received, the organisations are illegal,” asking the charity commissioner to look into the matter comes under their jurisdiction.



“We have received complaints from the residents of Maval tehsil, claiming that they have been harassed by bodies and individuals posing as RTI activists and NGOs. Since the trusts and NGOs are registered with the charity office, we have forwarded the complaints to the charity commissioner to take actions based on their findings,” said Rajesh Bansode, deputy commissioner of police, ACB, Pune.



The charity commissionerate had already made it clear that any society, NGO or trust registered with them has no power or authority to supervise or monitor other organisations or government departments. Earlier similar complaints were received by the office made by the Indian Medical Association (IMA) after which circulars were issued, warning action against those found guilty of such acts.



Talking about the issue, Navnath Jagtap, deputy charity commissioner of Pune, said, “We have issued orders to conduct inquiry into the issue and a charity inspector has been assigned to conduct the inquiry. The name of the organisation that has been mentioned in the complaint is registered with us. It was always clear that organisations registered with us cannot investigate or supervise in the work of other organisation or any government office. Everyone has to work in the ambit of their objectives.”



“We are going to check the objectives of the organisations that they have stated while getting their trusts or NGOs registered with us. If the organisations are found to be taking any undue advantage pf their position, action will be taken against them,” said Jagtap.



Speaking to Mirror, NS Yadav, president of the organisation named in the letter, said, “We have been doing a clean and good job of helping the society at large. Based on our complaints, actions were taken against corrupt officials by the government itself. It is highly possible that the complaint made against us was done by one of those disgruntled bodies or people. We have not taken a single penny from anyone and this is what has been instructed to all our members. I will look into the issue going on in Maval. If anyone is found indulging in any unethical practice we will take action against them and remove them from the organisation.”


