Congress to go for hard bargain in power sharing with NCP, Shiv Sena

Maharashtra power tussle continued to dominate headlines even on Tuesday, which is almost around three weeks since the election results were declared. With Shiv Sena scrambling for options, Congress and NCP are back in the limelight and have been holding hectic meetings and discussions to finalise modalities of government formation with Sena, an ideological opponent.

Congress and NCP leaders met in Mumbai on Tuesday evening to discuss the terms and conditions under which they can extend support to Shiv Sena's claim to form the government in Maharashtra.

NCP chief Sharad Pawar and Congress leader Ahmed Patel addressed a joint press conference in Mumbai and sent out a clear message that both parties are giving government formation in Maharashtra a serious thought.



Congress being the more reluctant partner will hope to strike a good bragain in this arrangement and that is one reason why Sonia Gandhi's chief troubleshooter Ahmed Patel rushed to Mumbai on Tuesday. Patel has been tasked with a decently tough job of ensuring that Congress is in good stead if the alliance works out with the Shiv Sena.



Congress sources have said that the party is likely to push for a one-third power sharing formula - an equal share in governance with NCP and Shiv Sena. This means 42 cabinet berths will have to be divided equally between the three partners. That will leave 14 ministerial berths each for NCP, Shiv Sena and Congress.



Congress is now likely to go for the hard bargain and push for plum portfolios like home and revenue ministries to be distributed fairly. Despite being the junior-most partner in terms of number of MLAs, the Congress wants to be treated at par. Congress has 44 MLAs while Shiv Sena has 56 and NCP has 54.



Also with the possibility of Shiv Sena bagging the Chief Minister's post, Congress is is likely to moot for two Deputy Chief Minister posts in the government and one of them a Congress leader.



All parties are treading very carefully considering the acrimonious past they have shared.
