Maharashtra govt formation: BJP will try to form the govt now, says Narayan Rane

BJP leader Narayan Rane | Photo Credit: ANI

Mumbai: After the recommendation of Maharashtra Governor Bhagat Singh Koshyari, President Ram Nath Kovind on Tuesday imposed the President's rule in Maharashtra which can stay in effect for as long as six months. The imposition has come at least three hours before the deadline that was given to the Nationalist Congress Party (NCP) by the Governor to stake claim to form government in the state. The NCP was invited to form the government after Shiv Sena had failed to present a requisite letter of support from alliance partners yesterday. Earlier, BJP had refused to form the government after a fallout with alliance partner Shiv Sena, which had vehemently demanded an equal share in CM's post and ministerial berths.

Maharashtra political developments HIGHLIGHTS:

9:00 pm: Since the President's rule will be in effect in Maharashtra for as long as six months, the BJP will get ample time to engage in horse-trading and poaching MLAs from other parties, said Digvijaya Singh taking a jibe at the saffron party.

8:45 pm: After BJP's core committee meeting, party leader Sudhir Mugantiwar said that the BJP will ensure that people's mandate in Maharashtra is respected. "We will try to form a stable government. We will stand by the people of the state," he added.

8:30 pm: Meanwhile, Maharashtra CM Devendra Fadnavis has issued a press note calling the President's rule in Maharashtra unfortunate. He added that he hopes for a stable government in the state soon.

8:15 pm: After Congress-NCP and Shiv Sena pressers, BJP addresses media

Speaking to media, BJP leader Narayan Rane said that an alliance between NCP and Shiv Sena is highly unlikely and hence, there is less likelihood of them forming government in the state.

"BJP will try to form the government. Devendra Fadnavis is putting in all efforts in this direction," he added.

The BJP leader also claimed that the saffron party has the support of 185 MLAs in Maharashtra.

8:00 pm: Shiv Sena chief Uddhav Thackeray briefs media

The Shiv Sena chief reiterated that his party, Congress and NCP can still form government in Maharashtra, and all the concerned parties are ideating on a common idea.

Talking about the Hindutva ideology, Thackeray said that Lord Ram is about keeping promises and BJP made false promises to him and then labelled him a liar.

"BJP-Shiv Sena were together for many years but now Shiv Sena has to go with Congress-NCP. We'll hold further talks with both of them," said Uddhav Thackeray.

"I would like to thank Arvind Sawant, many people have lust for ministerial post but he isn't like that. Proud of him," he added.

When asked about reconciling with BJP again, Uddhav Thackeray said, "Why are you in such a hurry? It's politics. 6 months time has been given (President's Rule). I didn't finish the BJP option, it was BJP itself which did that..."

7:30 pm: Congress-NCP joint press conference begins

NCP leader Praful Patel confirmed that a meeting was held between senior leaders of NCP and Congress today. On 11th November Shiv Sena first contacted the NCP formally and the NCP will discuss on all the issues and then take a decision.

Congress' Ahmed Patel condemned the imposition of President's rule in Maharashtra and said that the BJP-led Central government has never cared about guidelines. He also lambasted the Maharashtra Governor for not inviting the Congress to stake claim to form government.

Clarifying why Congress did not give the letter of support to Shiv Sena, Patel added, "Congress president said certain issues needed to be clarified and hence we couldn't have given letter before that. We came down to discuss that only."

No alliance can be formed in haste and we are still discussing modalities of a potential alliance. We are holding talks with NCP and will talk to Shiv Sena later, said the Congress leader.

NCP chief Sharad Pawar asserted, "We are in no hurry. We will hold discussions with Congress and then take a decision (to support Shiv Sena)."

7:15 pm: Shiv Sena chief Uddhav Thackeray has reportedly told his party leaders that they can still form the government in the state.

7:00 pm: Former Madhya Pradesh Chief Minister Digvijaya Singh questioned the untimely imposition of President's rule in Maharashtra and alleged that the decision has been taken under the pressure of Prime Minister Narendra Modi and Union Home Minister Amit Shah.

#WATCH Digvijaya Singh, Congress: ...This decision (President's Rule in Maharashtra) has been taken under pressure from Prime Minister and Home Minister, we object to this. pic.twitter.com/GRaEoTPG5P — ANI UP (@ANINewsUP) November 12, 2019

6:45 pm: Supreme Court Justice Sharad Arvind Bobde will hear Shiv Sena's plea tomorrow at 10:30 am. Shiv Sena has filed a petition in Supreme Court challenging Maharashtra Governor's decision to not extend the time given to the party to prove their ability to form the government.

"Supreme Court registry has said they may mention the matter tomorrow before the court, for urgent hearing. Fresh/second petition challenging the imposition of President's Rule is being readied. The decision on when to file it will be taken tomorrow," confirmed Shiv Sena's lawyer Sunil Fernandes.

6:30 pm: Shiv Sena's lawyer Rajesh Inamdar said, "About the President's Rule, whatever information I'm getting it's through the news channels. Let's have a legal discussion on this and accordingly, if there is a necessity of filing a petition, we will take legal recourse as per law."

6:15 pm: Ministry of Home Affairs has issued an official statement reading: "Maharashtra Governor was of the view that it has been 15 days since the conclusion of the electoral process and none of the political parties are in the position to form a govt in the state; President's Rule is a better option."

6:00 pm: One of the advocates of Congress leader Kapil Sibal's legal team confirmed that the party has filed a petition in the Supreme Court against the President's rule and sought an urgent hearing of the plea.

5:45 pm: Speaking on Shiv Sena's plea in the Supreme Court, Maharashtra government's lawyer said, "Today I came to know about the filing of a petition by Shiv Sena, challenging the communication of the Governor by which their claim has been rejected with regard to the formation of the govt."

"I will have to receive a copy of the petition, then I will have to see the prayers, contents, grounds and thereafter appropriate steps will be taken," he added.

5:30 pm: President Ram Nath Kovind approved the NDA's recommendation and imposed President's rule in Maharashtra after 19 days of political turmoil in the state. The President's rule will stay in effect for six months.

It should be noted that the NCP was given a deadline of 8:30 pm today by the Governor to stake claim to form government in Maharashtra, however, President's rule has been imposed before the deadline.

5:15 pm: After Shiv Sena moved the Supreme Court earlier in the day demanding urgent hearing of its plea, reports suggest that the top court might not hear the case today.

5:00 pm: Former Maharashtra CM and senior Congress leader Ashok Chavan has said that the grand old party stands united with the NCP and will only take a decision with regard to the govt formation in the state after holding talks with the Sharad Pawar's party.

4:45 pm: Congress leaders Mallikarjun Kharge, Ahmed Patel and KC Venugopal have arrived in Mumbai to meet NCP chief Sharad Pawar. The Congress delegation will discuss the ongoing political situation in Maharashtra with Pawar and the final decision will be announced after the meet.

4:30 pm: According to sources, the Nationalist Congress Party (NCP) is pushing for a 50-50 share of the Chief Minister's post with Shiv Sena. It is also being reported that NCP is uncomfortable going into alliance with Sena without Congress.

4:15 pm: Congress leader Randeep Surjewala lashed out at Governor BS Koshiyari saying, "Governor Koshiyari has committed a grave travesty of the democracy & made a mockery of the Constitutional process in recommending President’s Rule in Maharashtra."

4:00 pm: Commenting on Maharashtra political situation, CPI leader Sitaram Yechury tweeted: "The floor test is what determines whether a ‘stable government’ is possible. The Bommai judgement amongst many others has made that very clear. What is the BJP afraid of? Modi had called the state victories “unprecedented” and Diwali gifts “before” Diwali."

3:50 pm: Governor must not act as a stumbling block to government formation, said Shiv Sena.

3:38 pm: Shiv Sena has filed a petition in Supreme Court challenging Maharashtra Governor's decision to not extend the time given to the party to prove their ability to form government. Advocate Sunil Fernandez has filed the plea for Shiv Sena.

"We are seeking urgent hearing today itself. Supreme Court registry is yet to revert on our prayer," said Fernandez.

2:24 pm: NCP's Nawab Malik said that party chief Sharad Pawar will take a decision on alternative government. "Today NCP meeting was held. All 54 MLAs were present. It has been decided that looking at the uncertainty in the state, we'll empower Sharad Pawar ji to take a decision on alternative government. A committee will be formed for the same which will be led by Sharad Pawar," Malik said.

"The party believes that it is not possible to form an alternative government without the coming together of the three parties (Congress, NCP, Shiv Sena). If the three don't come together, there cannot be a stable government in Maharashtra," he added.

2:37 pm: As per sources, Shiv Sena has spoken to senior advocate Kabil Sibal to fight its case in SC where a three-day extension was denied by Maharashtra Governor, although it was given to BJP. Sibal has agreed to take up the case and appear for it as early as today.

2:35 pm: Congress spokesperson Jaiveer Shergill tweeted: "Governor’s report recommending Presidents Rule in Maharashtra after giving NCP invitation to form Govt smacks of arbitrariness & illegality unless Report recommends President Rule if NCP also fails-voters don’t deserve President’s Rule-Hope for the best."

Congress' Abhishek Manu Singhvi on the development, saying, "Maharashtra cannot give 48 hours to Shiv Sena for

Maharashtra government formation but BJP can avail 5 weeks in other states is an arbitrary use of power by the Governor. This is what happens when constitutional posts are used to further political motivations."

2:30 pm: As per ANI sources, Shiv Sena may approach the Supreme Court if the Maharashtra Governor imposes President's rule in the state. Uddhav Thackeray has talked to Kapil Sibal and Ahmed Patel over the issue.

2:14 pm: Maharashtra Congress spokesperson slammed the Governor, saying he is the puppet of the BJP. Despite giving time to NCP, if he has moved in direction of implementing President's rule, it is a blot on the Governor's chair, the spokesperson said.

2:10 pm: Unfazed by Governor's recommendation to implement President’s rule in Maharashtra, Congress-NCP-Sena will continue to discuss government formation in the state, as senior Congress leaders reached Mumbai to hold a meeting with NCP chief Sharad Pawar to finalise modalities till 8:30 pm, the deadline set by the Governor.

1:58 pm: Prime Minister Narendra Modi called a cabinet meeting just before his departure this afternoon for BRICS summit in Brazil amid Maharashtra political drama.

1:45 pm: The Shiv Sena lashed out following the development that the Governor has recommended President’s Rule in the state. Party spokesperson Priyanka Chaturvedi questioned the move through a post on social media platform Twitter, and said, “How can the honourable governor recommend President rule till the time given to NCP doesn’t lapse?”

How can the honourable governor recommend President rule till the time given to NCP doesn’t lapse? https://t.co/YuSNhyPQUf — Priyanka Chaturvedi (@priyankac19) November 12, 2019

1:30 pm: The Shiv Sena, NCP and Congress are in a huddle after the Union cabinet recommended President's rule amid a stalemate over government formation. Governor's office has not confirmed the report as yet.

1:05 pm: “Our party has already taken a stand, won't go with BJP or Shiv Sena. Let the people of Maharashtra see what these parties are doing. There is no difference between the two Hindutva parties. Now, we are seeing NCP and Congress coming together. Post the Ayodhya verdict, we are seeing the true face of the Congress party. People will now know who was cutting whose votes and who was colluding with whom," AIMIM chief Asaduddin Owaisi.

Asaduddin Owaisi,AIMIM on being asked,"if there is a scenario of NCP Chief Minister (in Maharashtra) then what will be your party's stand": Pehle nikaah hoga, uske baad sochenge ki beta hoga ya beti hogi. Abhi toh nikaah hi nahi hua. Nothing to consider. Yeh sab khel ho raha hai. https://t.co/CEzPzriyOR — ANI (@ANI) November 12, 2019

12:45 pm: Shiv Sena likely to approach the Supreme Court if President's rule is imposed in Maharashtra. This is against the decision which denied them an extension.

12:25 pm: “NCP and Congress have always been together. Everything has to be cleared between us before any decision is taken. We will take call once the meeting is over,” senior Congress leader Mallikarjun Kharge.

12:10 pm: Nationalist Congress Party and the Congress are expected to meet at 4 pm today in Mumbai. Senior Congress leaders Ahmed Patel, Mallikarjun Kharge and KC Venugopal are also expected to attend the meeting. UPA chairperson and interim Congress chief Sonia Gandhi will be chairing the meet.

12 noon: Shiv Sena chief Uddhav Thackeray arrives to meet party leader Sanjay Raut at Lilawati Hospital.

Mumbai: Shiv Sena chief Uddhav Thackeray arrives to meet party leader Sanjay Raut at Lilawati hospital today. Raut was admitted to hospital yesterday after he complained of chest pain. pic.twitter.com/DtAJZskDsc — ANI (@ANI) November 12, 2019

11:05 am: NCP sources have said that they want a stable government and that would happen only if Congress joins hands. An alliance stitched together in haste only for ‘Operation Lotus’ to happen later is not something that the party wants. Hence, the party is trying to get both parties on board. But, some hard bargaining is to be expected from the Congress, they said.

10:50 am: NCP chief made a shocking remark while speaking to reporters on whether NCP would meet Congress, amid rumours that the two parties could come together to form government. "Who says there is a meeting? I don't know," Pawar told reporters.

#WATCH NCP Chief Sharad Pawar on being asked if there is a meeting scheduled today between Congress and NCP: Who says there is a meeting? I don't know. #MaharashtraGovtFormation pic.twitter.com/Tz2ytPGBHn — ANI (@ANI) November 12, 2019

10:27 am: Sharad Pawar to meet Shiv Sena leader Sanjay Raut at Lilawati hospital today. Raut was admitted to hospital yesterday after he complained of chest pain.

10:15 am: On being asked if there is a delay on part of Congress, NCP chief Sharad Pawar said, "I will talk to the Congress."

10:00 am: NCP's Ajit Pawar ruled out any misunderstanding with Congress, saying they would take the decision on forming the government with Shiv Sena together.

"Whatever decision will be taken, it will be taken collectively, so we were waiting for Congress' response yesterday but it didn't come. We can't decide on it alone. There is no misunderstanding, we contested together and are together," he said.

9:40 am: A Congress leader from Maharashtra said that talks over the Shiv Sena-Congress-NCP alliance are still going on. "Process is still underway, but the end result will be positive. Personally I think the three (Shiv Sena-Congress-NCP) parties will form the government and a Shiv Sena leader will be the CM," said Kagda Chandya Padvi, Congress leader from Maharashtra, ANI reported.

9:30 am: Shiv Sena MLAs to meet at 10 am. Sena chief Uddhav Thackeray and his son Aaditya will also attend the meeting.

9:00 am: President Ram Nath Kovind, as advised by the Prime Minister, has accepted the resignation of Arvind Sawant from the Union Council of Ministers, with immediate effect, under clause (2) of Article 75 of the Constitution. The President has directed that Prakash Javadekar, Cabinet Minister, be assigned the charge of the Ministry of Heavy Industries and Public Enterprises, in addition to his existing portfolios.

Background

Maharashtra has been witnessing a political turmoil since the results of Maharashtra elections were announced with the Shiv Sena insisting on equal distribution of cabinet berths in Maharashtra Assembly and sharing the CM post with its ally BJP for 2.5 years each. The BJP, however, has been adamant on its stand that Devendra Fadanvis will continue to be the chief minister for the entire term.

The Shiv Sena had yesterday claimed that it would form government in the state with the help of Congress and NCP which have 44 and 54 MLAs respectively.

Sena- the second single largest party in the state with 56 MLAs was invited by Governor in Maharashtra to indicate the willingness and ability of his party to form the government in Maharashtra by 7.30 pm yesterday but it failed to show strength.

Governor Bhagat Singh Koshyari had earlier invited BJP - the single largest party in Maharashtra with 105 MLAs to stake claim to form the government but it declined the invitation as it was 40 short of a clear majority mark of 145.

As the political crisis in Maharashtra deepened, the Governor recommended President's rule in the state under Article 356 of the Indian Constitution.

Under Article 356 of the Indian Constitution, in the event of a state government being unable to function as per constitutional provisions, the central government can take direct control of the state.

"The Governor of Maharashtra Shri Bhagat Singh Koshyari having been satisfied that as the government of the State of Maharashtra cannot be carried on in accordance with the Constitution, has today submitted a report as contemplated by the provisions of Art.356 of the Constitution." Governor's office said in a letter to President Ram Nath Kovind.
