UP Police: 99 arrested, 65 cases registered for objectionable posts on social media after Ayodhya verdict

UP DGP Om Prakash Singh | Photo Credit: Twitter

Key Highlights The Supreme Court on Saturday directed the central government to hand over the disputed site at Ayodhya for the construction of a temple The Uttar Pradesh government has released a picture of what the temple would look like after completion AIMIM president Asaduddin Owaisi called the judgment as a victory of “faith over facts”

Lucknow: Ninety-nine people have been arrested and 65 cases have been registered till November 12, for objectionable posts on social media following the Ayodhya verdict. Meanwhile, action has also been taken against 13,016 social media posts, including reporting and deletion of the said posts.

The information was shared by the office of the Director-General of Police (DGP) Uttar Pradesh.

The Supreme Court on Saturday directed the central government to hand over the disputed site at Ayodhya for the construction of a temple and set up a trust for the same.

The apex court further directed the government to give five acres of land to the Sunni Waqf Board for the construction of a mosque.

Meanwhile, the grand Ram temple proposed to be built at the Ram Janmabhoomi in Ayodhya after the Supreme Court verdict is set to be completed before 2022, the 75th year of India's independence.

The Uttar Pradesh government has released a picture of what the temple would look like after completion.

As per the sources, the Ram idol will take three years to complete.

While the BJP and the Congress welcomed the verdict, All India Majlis-e-Ittehadul Muslimeen (AIMIM) president Asaduddin Owaisi called the judgment as a victory of “faith over facts” adding that the Supreme Court is “supreme but not infallible”.

Owaisi further expressed apprehension that the Sangh Pariwar might use this judgment to lay claims on other mosques which were built on temples saying that the list includes the mosques at Mathura, Kashi and Lucknow.

The Hyderabad MP also warned that the country was heading on the path of a 'Hindu Rashtra'.

“Sangh Pariwar and BJP have been saying that the road to Hindu Rashtra starts from Ayodhya. They now want to bring NRC, Citizenship Amendment Bill. In fact, Modi 2.0 is to make India a Hindu Rashtra,” news agency IANS quoted him as saying.

Slamming the Congress he said that the grand old party had shown its true colours through its reaction on the Ayodhya title dispute verdict by the apex court. Recalling that it was during the Congress tenure that idols were placed in the mosque, following which its locks were opened and the mosque was demolished Owaisi said: “But for hypocrisy and deceit of the Congress, this judgment would not have come.”

Reading out the "unanimous" judgement in a packed courtroom CJI Ranjan Gogoi on Saturday said that there is clear evidence that Hindus believe Lord Ram was born at the disputed site adding that Babri Masjid was not constructed on vacant land and that there was a structure underlying the disputed structure which was not an Islamic structure.
