Russian consul general writes to home minister

Ahmedabad: The consul general of the Russian Federation in Mumbai, Aleksei Surovtsev, on Tuesday wrote to the state home minister to protect the rights of a Russian national living in the city, who alleged threats from Sardarnagar police.

Last week, 38-year-old Alla Afanasyeva, who is married to a Sardarnagar resident Santosh Nihlani, complained before the Russian embassy about the alleged harassment by local cops after the arrest of her husband in connection with an alleged quarrel with local goons on September 19. She alleged that she met the home minister and senior police officers and urged them to protect her from the police’s ire because she had nothing to do with his disputes. But since there was no response from the authorities, she expressed her wish to return to Russia as she cannot tolerate police harassment.

In response, the consulate general requested the home minister and the chief secretary to ensure that the Russian national is not harassed because she expressed “her deep concern over behaviour and approach of local police towards her”.

The communiqué reads, “Without intention of interfering in the law enforcement and inner procedures stipulated by the respective regulations of the Government of India, Government of Gujarat and other concerned authorities, Consulate General kindly requests you to look into the matter with the aim to provide thorough investigation, guarantee and protect legitimate interests of the Russian National Mrs Alla Afanasyeva."

Earlier, Afanasyeva mentioned in her complaint before the embassy that though she was not an accused in the FIR registered with the Sardarnagar police, local cops threatened her to send her to jail, if she did not act according to their wish. She wrote that her husband is a senior manager in a private bank. He was arrested and later released on bail on October 23. But when her husband was in jail, local PSI threatened her.



Facebook Twitter Linkedin EMail
