Opp leaders stand by TMC supremo

If CBI is being misused, it is a matter of grave concern, says Shiv Sena

West Bengal Chief Minister Mamata Banerjee fight against the Centre has galvanised the Opposition. Several top Opposition leaders have vowed to join Mamata’s protest in Kolkata to express solidarity with the TMC supremo.

Support from Opposition leaders like Rahul Gandhi, Sharad Pawar, Akhilesh Yadav, Tejashwi Yadav, N Chandrababu Naidu, Arvind Kejriwal poured in for Mamata, who began her sit-in protest in Kolkata on Sunday night over the CBI’s attempt to question the city police chief in connection with chit fund scams.

While the Shiv Sena, which is BJP’s partner at Centre and State Government, said if a State as big as West Bengal can be targeted by the Centre then under federal structure it is a serious matter.

“If the CM of a big State as WB is sitting on dharna, then it is a serious matter. Is this CBI vs Mamata Banerjee or Mamata Banerjee vs BJP? We’ll find out soon. If CBI is being misused, it’s a matter of dignity of the nation, and prestige of the agency,” said Shiv Sena spokesman Sanjay Raut.

The BJD, which has often sided with the Modi Government, too backed Mamata over the alleged misuse of the CBI by the Centre and claimed that the federal probe agency was being “used as a political weapon” ahead of the general elections.

The BJD in a statement said, “Institutional integrity of the CBI has to be restored. We are a mature democracy and professionalism should be maintained.”

Congress president Rahul called up Mamata and extended support to her, saying the entire Opposition is together and it will defeat the fascist forces. He alleged the events in West Bengal were part of an unrelenting attack on India’s institutions by Prime Minister Narendra Modi and the BJP.

While Andhra Pradesh Chief Minister N Chandrababu Naidu said it was a glaring example of how “Modi-Shah duo are destroying the institutions”, Delhi Chief Minister Arvind Kejriwal came out in support of the TMC chief. “Spoke to Mamata didi and expressed solidarity. “Modi-Shah duo’s action is completely bizarre and anti-democracy,” he tweeted.

Samajwadi Party (SP) chief Akhilesh termed the CBI’s action undemocratic and against the spirit of the Constitution. “The BJP wants to stay in power by hook or by crook. They are so scared of losing that the CBI is being used as election agents.

This is undemocratic and against spirit of the Constitution. We demand due process be followed so that the CBI is not used as a tool of political interference,” he tweeted.

Rashtriya Janata Dal (RJD) president Lalu Prasad said the Constitution and constitutional institutions in the country were facing an “unprecedented crisis” and alleged that there were “attempts to plunge the country into a civil war”.

RJD supremo’s younger son Tejashwi Yadav called on Mamata over phone and announced to visit Kolkata soon to join her protest.

NCP president Sharad Pawar wrote on the micro-blogging site,” #Assualtondemocracy - blatant misuse of CBI in #WestBengal to intimidate the opposition and settle political scores.”

Former Chief Ministers of Jammu and Kashmir - National Conference leader Omar Abdullah and PDP chief Mehbooba Mufti also threw their weight behind Banerjee, saying the use of agency as a political tool has crossed all limits.
