President's Rule in Maharashtra: Manmohan to Modi, it's the same script

Minutes before leaving for Brics summit in Brazil, Prime Minister Narendra Modi held an urgent Union Cabinet meeting approving President's Rule in Maharashtra after Shiv Sena of Uddhav Thackeray failed to muster support for government formation.

A fractured mandate, political logjam, emergency meeting for President's Rule and a foreign tour -- imposition of President's Rule in Maharashtra by the Narendra Modi government has uncanny similarities with a similar move in Bihar in 2005. That time, the decision had been taken by the Congress-led UPA government under Manmohan Singh.

The move to impose President's Rule in Maharashtra suddenly accelerated on Tuesday even as the NCP, the Congress and the Shiv Sena were working overtime to ink a common-minimum programme (CMP). Maharashtra Governor Bhagat Singh Koshiyari had invited Sharad Pawar's NCP to express its willingness and possibility of forming a government in the state on Monday.

The invitation to the NCP was extended after Koshiyari refused to grant three days to the Shiv Sena to ramp up support from the NCP and the Congress - the two parties it was in talks for arriving at a power-sharing formula after breaking away from the BJP.

THE URGENCY

While the Shiv Sena got 24 hours to submit letters of support showing majority in Maharashtra Assembly, the NCP did not get the same amount of time to do it. The three parties - the Shiv Sena, the NCP and the Congress - were in the middle of a power-sharing talk, when news broke that Governor Koshiyari had recommended President's Rule in Maharashtra and Prime Minister Narendra Modi had called a meeting of the Union Cabinet to decide on the Koshiyari's recommendation.

Minutes later, PM Modi left for Brazil where he was scheduled to attend Brics (Brazil, Russia, India, China and South Africa) summit. By Tuesday evening, President's Rule had been imposed in Maharashtra, stalling the power-sharing parleys among the Shiv Sena, the NCP and the Congress involving their party presidents - Uddhav Thackeray, Sharad Pawar and Sonia Gandhi respectively.

Imposition of President's Rule was promptly challenged in the Supreme Court. This episode mirrors what had happened 14 years ago in Bihar.

MAHARASHTRA MIRRORS BIHAR

Like Maharashtra, the Bihar Assembly election of February 2005 produced a hung assembly. The only difference in Bihar's case was that the voters actually gave a fractured mandate with the NDA (BJP+JDU) getting 92 seats (37 BJP, 55 JDU). The RJD got 75 while the Congress 10. The majority mark was 122. In Maharashtra, the voters gave majority to the ruling alliance of the BJP and the Shiv Sena, which fell apart post election.

Election results were announced on February 27, 2005 in Bihar. Then Governor Buta Singh - a former Punjab chief minister and a Congress veteran - waited for seven days and recommended President's Rule in his letter to the Centre. In Maharashtra, Governor Koshiyari waited for 19 days, for record.

In mid-April, BJP-JDU staked claim to form government in Bihar, claiming support of 115 MLAs. But Buta Singh wrote a fresh letter to the President claiming that the BJP-JDU alliance was trying to "buy" MLAs belonging to the LJP of Ram Vilas Paswan, now a Union minister in the NDA government at the Centre. The LJP had won 29 seats in February 2005 Bihar election.

2005 WAS A STEP AHEAD

Roughly a month later, Buta Singh shot off another recommendation to the Centre. He said Bihar Assembly should be dissolved. The recommendation came on May 21. But it was put on fast-forward mode on the evening of May 22. A meeting of top leaders of the Congress - headed by Sonia Gandhi - was held in the evening.

Buta Singh's recommendation was considered so urgent by the Manmohan Singh government - a day after it was made - that the Union Cabinet met at midnight. It accepted Buta Singh's report on Bihar's political situation.

Decision was taken to dissolve the Bihar Assembly and a fax was sent to President APJ Abdul Kalam's camp in Moscow. Kalam was on an official tour of Russia. He gave his nod for dissolution of Bihar Assembly in two hours.

Fresh elections were to the Bihar Assembly were held in October 2005. This time, the voters gave a clear majority to the BJP-JDU alliance.

RAP ON THE KNUCKLES

Interestingly, it was in October (7th) that the Supreme Court ruled dissolution of Bihar Assembly unconstitutional. But the court stopped short of ordering to restore Bihar Assembly as the fresh election had already been notified.

In the detailed judgment, pronounced in January 2006, the Supreme Court bench led by then Chief Justice YK Sabharwal said, "The drastic and extreme action under Article 356 cannot be justified on ... whims and fancies of the governor... The Council of Ministers [of the Congress-led government] should have verified the facts stated in the report of the governor before hurriedly accepting it as gospel truth. Clearly the governor has misled the Council of Ministers."

IS GOVT READY HEAD BACKWARD?

Similar speculation is going on in Maharashtra this time around. It is being said that the BJP is gearing up for fresh election in Maharashtra early next year. Senior Congress leader and former Mumbai unit president Sanjay Nirupam, too, made a similar prediction on Monday, when he said, "No matter who forms govt and how? But the political instability in Maharashtra cannot be ruled out. Get ready for early elections. It may take place in 2020. Can we go to the elections with Shiv Sena as a partner?"

But for fresh election in Maharashtra, the assembly requires to be dissolved. With Supreme Court judgment in backdrop, will the Modi government and President Ram Nath Kovind take that risk? Late Kalam had almost quit as president when the Supreme Court judgment held his decision to sign dissolution of Bihar Assembly from Moscow "unconstitutional".
