Is Thailand safe for travel? Latest Foreign Office travel advice as Storm Pabuk hits

Tropical Storm Pabuk has hit parts of Thailand - here's what to do if you have a holiday planned

Tropical Storm Pabuk has made landfall in Thailand, bringing with it strong winds and torrential rainfall as well as sea surges.

Holidaymakers on the popular island of Koh Samui have been left stranded as ferry services to and from the island were suspended - and Bangkok Airways cancelled all flights to and from the island, although it has since announced on Twitter it plans to resume them on Saturday 5th January.

The storm is currently over the southern coast of Thailand in regions such as Pak Phanang and Nakhon Si thammarat, and is believed to be moving towards the north western regions of the island.

Thailand is a popular winter sun destination for Brits, but what if you have a holiday booked there in the next few days?

We take a look at the latest FCO travel advice and what to do if you had planned on travelling in the next few days.

Latest FCO travel advice

The Foreign Office currently advises against all but essential travel to provinces on the Thai-Malaysia border. This includes:

Pattani

Yala

Narathiwat

Southern Songkhla province. The advice against all but essential travel does not include areas north of and including the A43 road between Hat Yai and Sakom, and areas north-west of and including the train line which runs between Hat Yai and Pedang Besar.

It's worth noting that because the storm made landfall on the southern coast of Thailand on the 4th January 2019, boat sailings and flights are affected.

The FCO warns that this may include provinces such as Surat Thani (Koh Samui, Koh Pha Ngan and Koh Tao), Chumporn, Nakhon Si Thammarat, Phuket, Krabi, Trang, Ranong, Phang Nga, Satun and Song Khla, as well as Pattani, Yala, and Narathiwat.

The advice is correct at the time of writing but make sure to regularly check the FCO Thailand travel advice page for more information.

If you are already in Thailand

The FCO advises that you check your travel plans with transport providers before leaving your hotel or home, follow instructions from local authorities and monitor weather warnings from the Thai Meteorological Department.

You can also find advice on their Tropical Cyclones page. If you need to contact local emergency services, call 1155 (tourist police) or 1669 (emergency medical services).

Image: AFP/Getty Images) AFP/Getty Images)

Contact your holiday provider/tour operator

If you booked a holiday package, your first point of call should be your travel provider. They will be able to advise you whether the trip is going ahead, or of any changes that may incur because of the storm.

If the storm continues and you want to cancel your holiday, you may be able to cancel without paying a fee.

This is because you are entitled to cancel for free when there are 'exceptional circumstances' which often include natural disasters such as floods, earthquakes and weather conditions.

It's worth noting that you'll get a full refund but won't be entitled to any compensation.

However, this will have to be considered an 'exceptional circumstance', so if the company rejects this claim then you may be subject to a cancellation fee if you do choose to go ahead and cancel anyway.

You can find out more about your rights on the Citizens Advice Bureau website.

A spokesperson for the Association of British Travel Agents (ABTA) advised: "Tropical Storm Pabuk has made landfall in Thailand over Pak Phanang, Nakhon Si thammarat and is moving in a north westerly direction.

"People on holiday in the region are advised to monitor news reports and follow any advice or instructions issued by the local authorities, their travel provider and their accommodation providers."

Image: AFP/Getty Images) AFP/Getty Images)

What to do if you didn't book a holiday package

You should check with your airline before you set off for the airport. At the time of writing, most airlines haven't cancelled flights to Thailand from the UK, but this could change so it's worth calling ahead before you travel.

If your flights are cancelled, it's unlikely you'll get compensation as the airline will be able to claim that it's an 'extraordinary circumstance'. However, if you do travel and find your flight is delayed by more than three hours, your airline should provide you with food, refreshments and in some cases, accommodation.

It's also worth getting in touch with your accommodation who will be able to advise you as to whether they are still open and the situation in the local area.

Check your travel insurance policy

Whether you booked a package holiday or your flights and hotel separately, check your travel insurance policy documents.

These will let you know if you are covered while travelling, as well as whether you are covered if you do end up cancelling your trip.

It's worth noting that most insurers won't pay out if you travel to regions which the FCO has advised against visiting.
