Transparent win: SC’s decision to bring Chief Justice under the RTI Act is a morale booster for the beleaguered law

By holding the Chief Justice of India as a public authority falling under the ambit of the Right to Information Act, Supreme Court’s verdict strikes a blow for transparency and accountability. The judgment comes at a time when the RTI Act and the information commissioners overseeing RTI appeals have been weakened by the Centre assuming greater powers in determining their tenure and terms of service. In a way judiciary has restated the salience of the RTI Act, just when the executive seemed intent on devaluing it.

The verdict sets at rest notions that RTI Act provisions pose a threat to judicial independence. SC has accepted the principle that disclosures serve public interest. However, the court also underscored the threats facing the judiciary while noting that RTI Act must not be used to destroy the institution. Therefore the judgment is justified in carving out certain limitations for exercising the Act’s provisions. In recent years, controversies have brought out severe churning within Supreme Court on issues like collegium deliberations, executive interference in judicial appointments and transfers, and CJI’s powers as master of roster in charge of setting up benches.

Given the enormous pressures under which judges work, information commissioners have the two-pronged task of ensuring their orders serve urgent public interest while not impeding the functioning of judges. By embracing transparency despite these recent setbacks, SC has sent out a strong message to other public functionaries. Political parties refuse to come under the RTI Act despite a Central Information Commission ruling in 2013. The claim that parties are not public functionaries is facetious given how they depend on funds collected from the public and exist for serving public interest. The RTI Act’s prescription of proactive disclosure of information should become the credo of every public institution.

Facebook Twitter Linkedin Email This piece appeared as an editorial opinion in the print edition of The Times of India.
