Mamata Banerjee continues satyagraha, BJP adds red diary twist to CBI chit fund probe: 10 developments

DMK's Kanimozhi and RJD's Tejashwi Yadav arrived late on Monday at the site in Kolkata where Mamata Banerjee is sitting on a dharna. (Photo: PTI)

The clash between Mamata Banerjee-led West Bengal state administration and Central Bureau of Investigation (CBI) intensified on Monday (February 4) with the later filing a contempt plea against top Kolkata Police officers for obstructing investigation in the Saradha chit fund scam.

What started off as a routine CBI operation on Sunday evening, has turned into a full-blown battle between the West Bengal administration and central agency.

From a demand for President’s Rule in the state to the red diary twist added by the BJP, here are 10 latest developments in the CBI vs Mamata clash:

A host of political leaders have come out in support of Didi, who has been sitting on a dharna since Sunday from 9 pm. Mamata Banerjee said on Monday that her protest will not stop till the "country is saved". Meanwhile, CBI wasted no time in moving the Supreme Court against West Bengal administration, police and Kolkata Police Commissioner for not cooperating in a probe ordered by the apex court.

Protests were reported across the city as Trinamool Congress (TMC) supporters burnt effigies of Prime Minister Narendra Modi and sloganeered against the Bharatiya Janata Party (BJP). A BJP office in Kolkata's Bhowanipore area was vandalised, according to a report by news agency ANI. Union minister Babul Supriyo demanded imposition of President's Rule in West Bengal as it was facing a "constitutional crisis" and called Mamata Banerjee a tainted leader. Meanwhile, West Bengal BJP chief Dilip Ghosh said nothing is secure in the state under Mamata Banerjee.

In court, CBI argued that it had issued summons to Kolkata Police Commissioner Rajeev Kumar multiple times but he failed to respond. CBI also accused Kumar of "creating obstacles in the case". A three-judge bench Supreme Court will hear the CBI's plea seeking Kumar's cooperation in the case today. The top court also asked the CBI to submit material evidence to support its claim that Rajeev Kumar is trying to destroy evidence in the chit fund scams

Chief Justice of India Ranjan Gogoi issued a stern warning to Kolkata Police Commissioner Rajeev Kumar. "The Central Bureau of Investigation has filed an interim application in the Supreme Court seeking directions to the West Bengal government to cooperate with the investigation in the chit fund scams. The CBI has argued that Kolkata Police Commissioner Rajeev Kumar was served with summons multiple times but he failed to respond and created obstacles in the investigation. CBI's plea seeks direction to Kolkata Police Commissioner to "faithfully cooperate with the investigating agency".

Ripples of the unprecedented event in Bengal were felt in the Parliament as leaders raised the issue in both houses. Union Minister Rajnath Singh called the situation in Bengal unprecedented. The Union home ministry is expected to seek a report on the role of IPS officers on the allegations of obstructing the investigation, which is in violation of service conduct rules.

While both the houses saw heavy disruption over Mamata vs CBI, Union minister Prakash Javadekar questioned what the Mamata Banerjee government was trying to hide. He said it is an attempt to stop the investigation in the chit fund scam. "It is a murder of democracy," he said. He hinted that the Kolkata Police Commissioner Rajeev Kumar may be in possession of the red diary and pen drives which belong to the chit fund boss. "There are meetings at CM residence but for the first time, CM went to CP residence. Why is she running away from enquiry? Javadekar asked.

Many leaders including senior Congress leader Mallikarjun Kharge accused the central government of using CBI "as a tool" to finish opposition parties. Commenting on the development, former Jammu and Kashmir chief minister Farooq Abdullah said the CBI is not above the government. He also extended support to West Bengal CM Mamata Banerjee. However, Rajnath Singh defended CBI's action in Bengal as it was a SC-directed probe.

Later in the day, Kolkata Police Commissioner Rajeev Kumar moved the Kolkata High Court seeking protection from CBI. Mamata said she did not mind when people from her party were arrested in the scam but an attack on Kumar is an attack on the Kolkata Police Commissioner's chair.

Meanwhile, CBI claimed that it had sent a letter to several Kolkata Police officers to join the probe. It had even written to the police department before Sunday's operation, adding that it was not received by authorities. On the other hand, Kolkata Police said it had not received any official document from CBI in relation to the case. CBI is expected to present an exclusive report in relation to the Saradha chit fund scam today in court. A three-judge Supreme Court bench comprising Chief Justice Ranjan Gogoi, Justice Deepak Gupta and Justice Sanjiv Khanna will hear CBI's pleas.

DMK's Kanimozhi and RJD's Tejashwi Yadav landed in Kolkata late on Monday and met with Mamata Banerjee at the site of her dharna. Both leaders slammed the BJP and blamed it of using the central agency to break down the Opposition. All eyes will be on CBI's exclusive report presentation at Supreme Court today as it will decide the future course of investigation in the chit fund case.
