Death Of Fathima Latheef —Communalising A Suicide

Fathima Latheef, a first-year student of of IIT-Madras, committed suicide by hanging from a ceiling fan in her hostel room last Saturday (9 November). Fathima was pursuing her five-year integrated MA programme in the Humanities and Development Studies department of the institute.

After initial investigation, the police stated that no suicide note was present. However, the image of an alleged ‘suicide note’ written by Fathima began to circulate on social media.

Fathima’s family members claimed that they have received a ‘suicide note’ from her phone in which she has mentioned the name of a professor as responsible her death. Fathima’s parents alleged that humiliation and caste discrimination by a faculty member had forced their daughter to take the extreme step.

“After reading the message and browsing her phone further, we were able to gather that my daughter was under constant harassment by one of her professors, who has hurt her dignity and it is the sole reason for her untimely death,” her father Abdul Latheef alleged.

Latheef also sought the help of Kerala Chief Minister Pinarayi Vijayan to ensure a fair probe into the circumstances leading to the student’s death. He alleged that Tamil Nadu police did not investigate the case properly.

The New Indian Express quoted a senior Chennai police officer, who is supervising the investigation in the case, as saying they were not aware of the allegations made by the student’s parents. A senior police officer said no one had access to her phone, indicating the “suicide note” could be fake.

According to a report in Maktoob Media (a media outfit run by Aslah Kayyalakkath, formerly associated with Al Jazeera ), the purported suicide note blames three faculty — Sudarsan Padmanabhan, Hemachandran Karah and Milind Brahme — as responsible for her suicide.

The Cognate, a portal which describes itself as ‘a digital news platform for Indian Muslim news, ideas, culture, and business’ published a provocatively titled article Taunted For Being Muslim, IIT Madras Student Commits Suicide, Blames Faculty. For this portal, it was enough that the victim was a Muslim and her alleged harassers had Hindu names.

Sections of social media took the communally-loaded narrative to the next level. With a typical ‘Brahminical’ name like ‘Sudarsan Padmanabhan’, the Hinduphobic elements on Twitter burst forth blaming ‘Sanghis’, ‘Brahminical hegemony’ and ‘Islamophobia’ for her suicide.

For instance, one handle alleged that ‘she committed suicide after facing religious and caste discrimination from her Professor Sudarshan Padmanabhan’. Another handle called it ‘institutional murder’ on minorities and blamed ‘Perpetuation of right wingers’.
