‘Osama Bin Laden was Pakistan’s hero,’ says Pervez Musharraf | Watch

Islamabad (Pakistan) | Jagran News Desk: Former Pakistan President Pervez Musharraf called Osama Bin Laden, Ayman al-Zawahiri, Jalaluddin Haqqani and others jihadi terrorists ‘Pakistan’s heroes’ and admitted that Kashmiris were "trained in Pakistan" as Mujahideen to fight against the Indian Army in Jammu and Kashmir.

“Kashmiris who came to Pakistan received a hero reception here. We used to train them and support them. We considered them as Mujahideen who will fight with the Indian Army. Then, various terrorist organisations like Lashkar-e-Taiba rose in this period. They (jihadi terrorists) were our heroes,” Musharraf can be heard in an interview shared by Pakistani politician Farhatullah Babar.

Gen Musharraf blurts that militants were nurtured and touted as 'heroes' to fight in Kashmir. If it resulted in destruction of two generations of Pashtuns it didn't matter. Is it wrong to demand Truth Commission to find who devised self serving policies that destroyed Pashtuns? https://t.co/5Q2LOvl3yb — Farhatullah Babar (@FarhatullahB) November 13, 2019

In the video, he also said that terrorist like Osama bin Laden and Jalaluddin Haqqani were ‘Pakistani heroes’.

Also Read | PM Modi holds ‘fruitful talks’ with Brazilian Prez Bolsonaro, invites him for Republic Day celebrations next year

“In 1979, we had introduced religious militancy in Afghanistan to benefit Pakistan, and to push the Soviets out of the country. We brought Mujahideen from all over the world, we trained them and supplied weapons to them. We trained the Taliban, sent them in. They were our heroes. Haqqani was our hero. Osama bin Laden was our hero. Ayman al-Zawahiri was our hero. Then the global environment changed. The world started viewing things differently. Our heroes were turned into villains,” Musharraf said in the interview.

The revelation by Musharraf is nothing but proof that Pakistan, which claims to have no interference in Kashmir, has been using terrorists to fuel tensions in the region.

India has repeatedly accused Pakistan of using its soil to perpetrate terror in neighbouring countries. Islamabad has been asked by the international community to take actions against terrorist groups.

(With ANI inputs)

Posted By: Aalok Sensharma
