Maharashtra: Internal revolt in Shiv Sena? MLAs question Thackerays’ insistence on CM post, leave hotel

Shiv Sena MLAs unhappy with Thackerays over their insistence on CM's post? | Photo Credit: PTI

Mumbai: Amid the ongoing power tussle in Maharashtra, which is presently under President's rule, massive unrest has been reported from inside the Shiv Sena camp.

Notably, Shiv Sena, which emerged as the second-largest party in the 288-member Maharashtra Assembly, quit its alliance with the BJP on the ground that the latter did not keep its word on equal power-sharing, which included sharing the chief minister's post.

After the BJP, which emerged as the single-largest party, refused to stake claim to form the government, Maharashtra Governor BS Koshyari had sent the invitation to Shiv Sena to form the government. However, Shiv Sena could not do so despite getting engaged in power-sharing negotiations with the NCP and the Congress.

After around three weeks of political drama, President's rule was imposed in Maharashtra on Tuesday.

However, this has not gone down well with Shiv Sena MLAs, who were kept at The Retreat Hotel in Mumbai's Malad due to the fear of poaching.

According to Times Now, huge unrest among the MLAs has forced Shiv Sena president Uddhav Thackeray to let the legislators go back to their respective constituencies.

On Tuesday and Wednesday nights, major ugly scenes were witnessed at the hotel when the MLAs got engaged in abusive arguments and fights also broke out, said sources. In the wake of the unrest, Shiv Sena MLA Aaditya Thackeray had rushed to the hotel on Tuesday night. The similar unrest forced Uddhav Thackeray to visit the MLAs last night.

The report suggested that the MLAs had begun to question the decision of the Thackearys’ on the CM position, asking why the entire party was being held to ransom for one post that would benefit only the Thackeray family.

Uddhav Thackeray’s decision to join hands with NCP chief Sharad Pawar has also not gone down well with the MLAs.

An MLA has reportedly warned Uddhav that Pawar will never let the Shiv Sena chief wrest control of the government and will take away all the lucrative Cabinet berths.

The MLAs also allegedly asked the Thackerays as to how they will explain to their electorate that they are going with those parties against whom they had campaigned against in the polls.

Meanwhile, BJP president Amit Shah, Wednesday, broke his silence on the issue of sharing the chief minister's post in Maharashtra, which derailed the Sena-BJP alliance.

The home minister said that both he and Prime Minister Narendra Modi, while addressing multiple rallies ahead of the October 21 polls, had cleared that if the BJP-Shiv Sena came to power, Devendra Fadnavis would be the chief minister. "No one questioned it back then," he said.
