Rafale review petitions: IAF stand vindicated, says ex-IAF chief Dhanoa

NEW DELHI: Grappling with just 30 fighter squadrons when at least 42 are needed to face a collusive Pakistan-China threat, the IAF on Thursday heaved a sigh of relief that it will now be able to induct the 36 Rafale fighters without controversy dogging the omni-role jets.After the Supreme Court ruling on the Rs 59,000 crore Rafale deal in the morning, top serving and retired IAF officers said politics should not be played with critical defence acquisitions because it only ends up jeopardizing the country’s military preparedness.“Our (IAF) stand has been vindicated. The price negotiations (contract negotiations committee) with France were headed by the then deputy chief who is now the IAF chief (Air Chief Marshal R K S Bhadauria). The deal was clean,” said Air Chief Marshal B S Dhanoa (retired), speaking to TOI.ACM Dhanoa, who retired as the IAF chief on September 30, said the Supreme Court judgement will also have a positive impact on the overall military procurement in the backdrop of controversies often delaying and derailing defence deals in India.The former IAF chief recalled he and his force had been needlessly criticized because they had simply defended the September 2016 contract. “We were told we were making political statements. But we were clear the deal was above board and good, both in terms of cost and capabilities. The Rafale is an excellent aircraft. We are happy the controversy has finally been buried. Political controversies should not be raked up against desperately-needed defence acquisitions,” he said.Defence minister Rajnath Singh , in turn, said, “The purchase of Rafale jets was done in a completely transparent manner, keeping in mind the urgency to update and upgrade India’s defence preparedness. Issues pertaining to defence preparedness and national security should never be politicized.”Welcoming the SC ruling, the defence ministry said it “brings to a close an exercise of vilification and casting doubts on the Defence acquisition process which has an adverse impact on the morale of the Security Forces.”The IAF brass contends the Rafale fighter will prove to be a “gamechanger” in air combat capabilities in the region because it could outgun any combat jet that China or Pakistan can deploy against India at present. “The 36 Rafales, along with 12 additional Sukhoi-30MKIs and 21 more MiG-29s to be procured from Russia as well as faster induction of the indigenous Tejas light combat aircraft, will help stem the depletion in our fighter squadrons,” said a senior officer.The first Rafale, which was handed over to India in France on October 8, incidentally, has the tail number “RB-001” to mark the role played by ACM Bhadauria in finalizing the 36-fighter deal. The first four Rafale jets will actually touch down in Ambala only in May next year after training of the “main” induction team of around 10 pilots, 10 flight engineers and 40 technicians in France. All the 36 jets – eight of them twin-seaters – will be delivered by April 2022.IAF has resurrected its 17 `Golden Arrows’ Squadron at Ambala for the first 18 Rafale jets meant for the western front with Pakistan. The 101 “Falcons” Squadron, in turn, will have the next 18 jets based at Hasimara (West Bengal) to cater for China.
