SC closes contempt case against Rahul Gandhi in Rafale case

The Supreme Court on Thursday closed the contempt proceedings against Congress leader Rahul Gandhi over his statement attributing a political statement to the top court, with a "word of caution" that he must be more careful in future.

Rahul Gandhi had courted controversy on April 10 this year, when he made a statement in the media which linked the Congress's 'chowkidar chor hai' campaign to the Supreme Court bench.

The Congress leader made the remarks on the day the Supreme Court had dismissed the Centre's preliminary objections over the admissibility of certain documents for supporting the review petitions against the December 14, 2018 verdict in the Rafale case.

The Congress MP had claimed that the Supreme Court by agreeing to hear the Rafale review petitions had accepted the allegations.

A contempt plea was filed before the bench of Chief Justice of India (CJI) Ranjan Gogoi, Justice SK Kaul and KM Joseph by BJP MP Meenakshi Lekhi, seeking criminal contempt proceedings against Rahul Gandhi.

"We must note that it is unfortunate that without verification or even perusing as to what is the order passed, the contemnor deemed it appropriate to make statements as if this Supreme Court had given an imprimatur to his allegations against the prime minister, which was far from the truth" noted the bench in its order, adding that the statement by Rahul Gandhi was "not one sentence or a one-off observation but a repeated statement in different manners conveying the same..."

Rahul Gandhi has come in for sharp criticism from the Supreme Court, which has cautioned him to "be more careful".

"We do believe that persons holding such important positions in the political spectrum must be more careful," the bench said. The court accepted the unconditional apology given by Rahul Gandhi and decided to close the contempt case.

"As to what should be his campaign line is for a political person to consider. However, this court or for that matter no court should be dragged into this political discourse valid or invalid, while attributing aspects to the court which had never been held by the court. Certainly, Mr Gandhi needs to be more careful in future," the bench said.
