Any ‘deal’ on Kulbhushan Jadhav out of question: FO

Pakistan on Thursday strongly rejected any deal on Indian spy Kulbhushan Jadhav, saying the decision of International Court of Justice (ICJ) will be implemented in accordance with the law of the land.

“Absolutely no deal on Kulbhushan. We will honour the ICJ judgment in light of the law of Pakistan and there should be no doubt about it,” Foreign Office spokesman Dr Faisal said at a weekly press briefing at the Ministry of Foreign Affairs. He endorsed an earlier statement of Inter-Services Public Relations (ISPR) director general who had rejected speculations about an amendment in Pakistan Army Act to implement the ICJ verdict regarding the convicted Indian navy commander.

The FO spokesman said Kartarpur Corridor is open for visit by any citizen of Pakistan. However, he clarified that media crew will require a prior security clearance for its equipment. On the first day of opening, around 12,000 persons including from India and Pakistan visited the Gurdwara, whereas up to 5,000 will be allowed in future on daily basis, he said.

On recent decision of Indian Supreme Court in Ayodhya case, the spokesman said the dangerous precedent has put all mosques across India under threat. “After Ayodhya case, the veneer of the so-called image of secular India has been completely shredded,” he said, adding that Pakistan strongly condemns the 1992’s demolition of Babari Mosque where Muslims used to pray for last 450 years. “It will raise voice at different levels against the decision of Indian judiciary which has permitted construction of temple at the site,” he added. The FO spokesman said India has cornered itself after its wrong decision of abrogating the special status of Jammu and Kashmir by scrapping articles 370 and 35-A. He called upon the international community to pressurise India on lifting the three-month-long curfew and internet blockage and also release the detained Kashmiri leaders. He rejected the notion that Pakistan has toned down its protest on Kashmir, saying there is no change in the policy. “Pakistan is not inching back from its stance on Kashmir and will always stand by it,” he added. About 265 fake websites being run by India in over 60 countries for propaganda against Pakistan, the spokesman said the study by an independent organisation is a manifestation of the fact that nothing good can be expected from India. Asked update on inquiry related to entry of social media star Hareem Shah into the briefing room of the Foreign Affairs Ministry, the spokesman said, “We have ascertained the facts and all necessary measures have been taken to prevent occurrence of any such incidents in future.”
