WB: BJP claims party worker hanged to death by TMC goons, questions liberals silence over political murder

West Bengal BJP president Dilip Ghosh

Key Highlights In October, West Bengal BJP had organized a sit-in here to protest against the killing of its workers Ever since the BJP made inroads in 2019 West Bengal Lok Sabha election winning 18 out of 42 seats, attacks on its party workers have increased In August, the body of a 19-year-old party worker was found hanging from a tree in West Midnapore

Kolkata: The BJP has alleged that a tribal party worker from Paschim Medinipur was hanged to death by Trinamool Congress goons.

“Why are the liberals so silent now on these brutal political murders in TMC ruled West Bengal? Would they be so silent if this was a BJP ruled state?” BJP Bengal tweeted.

In August, the body of a 19-year-old party worker was found hanging from a tree in West Midnapore district's Pingla. The family members of the deceased had blamed the Trinamool Congress for the killing.

The man identified as Pintu Manna (19) was a resident of Pingla's Narangdighi.

In September, Swarup Gorai, an active BJP worker, was shot at by assailants in Ramkrishnapur village under Nanoor police station of Birbhum district after which the saffron party blamed the TMC for the attack. Gorai who was grievously injured succumbed to his injuries two days later at a city hospital.

In August, a fifty-year-old BJP worker died after miscreants hurled crude bombs towards him in West Bengal's Birbhum district. The man identified as Dalu Sheikh, 50, was an active worker of the saffron party.

Locals alleged that the miscreants who killed Sheikh belonged to the TMC and claimed that the police arrived quite late after the incident at the crime scene.

Speaking on the issue, state BJP General Secretary Sayantan Basu said their party workers were systematically being targeted time and again by the TMC cadre.

This cannot go on and the accused people should not be spared, IANS quoted him as saying.

Ever since the BJP made inroads in 2019 West Bengal Lok Sabha election-winning 18 out of 42 seats, attacks on its party workers have increased.

The TMC had 22 seats in the polls.

In October, West Bengal BJP organized a sit-in here to protest against the killing of its workers in the state in recent times.

The saffron party claimed that eight of its party workers were killed in Bengal in the past one week of October alone. Talking to the media, West Bengal BJP president Dilip Ghosh said that party workers were routinely being killed in Bengal further adding that the TMC government after losing all connects with the masses is now trying to rule by using terror tactics.

He also said that they will fight until this government is ousted from power.

The state unit also met Union Home Minister Amit Shah and President Ram Nath Kovind to apprise them about the “complete breakdown” of the law and order situation in West Bengal.
