Ayodhya: Why We Should Move On

On November 9, we reached a tide in the affairs of our nation that, to paraphrase Shakespeare, if taken at the flood, could lead us to peace and prosperity but omitted, could continue to bind us in the shallows of our past miseries. On that day, with its verdict on the 70-year-old Ram Janmabhoomi-Babri Masjid case, the Supreme Court brought closure to one of the darkest chapters in the history of independent India. Few disputes had divided the country as starkly on religious lines as this one. The poisonous brew of politics and religion tore our nation asunder for decades and pushed us to the edge of the precipice. No internal communal conflict claimed as many innocent lives-2,000 at last count-as the conflagration over the Ram temple did, spawning a retaliatory bloodlust and opening our flanks to a hostile western neighbour to stoke the flames of communal antagonism.

The Supreme Court verdict is an opportunity for us to step back from the brink. The highest court of the land rightly sensed a greater virtue in clarity and decisiveness as it str­ove to find a rare unanimity and supreme balance. The logic with which the five learned justices arrived at the same conclusion will continue to be hotly debated. Many will question whether the judges allowed faith to trump jurisprudence. And whether they took a majoritarian view by ignoring facts and evidence that had been acknowledged in the course of the hearings. But even in the heat of the argument, it must be proudly acknowledged that the judgment emerged from a close adherence to due process and was based on evide­nce that ran into thousands of pages, meticulously pieced together over several decades and with fair hearings to all concerned. And that the tone and tenor of the judgment was a clear signal and appeal to everyone as a nation to collectively move on.

Prime Minister Narendra Modi, while appealing for calm after the verdict, rightly pointed out that "this controversy may have affected many generations, but after this decision we have to make a resolution that now a new generation will start building a new India. This decision of the Supreme Court has brought a new dawn for us. Be it Ram bhakti or Rahim bhakti, it is imperative that we strengthen the spirit of Rashtra bhakti. Harmony, unity and peace are very important for the development of the country."

Yet, even as we move on, we must not forget what brought us to this sorry pass, for the past will remain with us and the only way to prevent it from constantly intruding into the present is to not try and blot it out of our consciousness. Instead, we must learn from it and use that understanding to move on. For, as Lewis B. Smedes, the American professor of theology, observed, "Forgiving does not erase the bitter past. A healed memory is not a deleted memory. Instead, forgiving what we cannot forget creates a new way to remember. We change the memory of our past into a hope for our future."

So, what do the conflict and verdict teach us? For one, a nation, just like an institution, ideology or individual, cannot prosper for long on a lie or a wrong. That comeuppance is only a matter of time. Pakistan was separated from India on the false premise that Hindus and Muslims could not coexist as equal citizens. Its founder saw religion as the raison d'etre for its nationhood. Yet barely 25 years after its formation, its eastern half broke away from it in a violent revolution and Bangladesh was born. A nation needs a far stronger force than religion to bind it together. The history of the West also shows how religions, instead of binding nations, ended up dividing them and causing endless conflict. As author Gore Vidal once observed, "More people have been killed in the name of Christ than any other name in the world."

The legend of Lord Ram, whose presumed birthplace this court battle was all about, is a symbol of this fundamental understanding. In Ramayana: The Legend of Prince Rama, Ram makes sacrifices in his personal life to uphold the dharma of the age-the tough precepts of rights, duties and social responsibilities. But even as he battled the evil Ravana represented, Ram admitted he was severely conflicted. At the height of the battle with Ravana, Ram told his brother Lakshman, "My brother, when we set out on this expedition, I too was full of anger and bitterness. But on our journey to Lanka, I have come to see that all of us have received the precious gift of life from the Gods, and that it is more important to be a good human being than to be just a good Kshatriya. Have we not, all of us, sprung from the same source? Rakshas, vanas, man, beast, the birds of the air, the fish of the ocean? Yet some of us, in ignorance, draw their bows and swords against their fellow creatures. Many have fallen on this battlefield today, and many more shall die before the war is done. As a Kshatriya, I shall continue to fight my battles. But when I burn the dead, I will pray for a world free from all wars, where a man does not raise his hand in anger against his own brother."

Many in the country, including Prime Minister Modi, saw it as an apt coincidence that the Supreme Court verdict was being delivered on the day the Kartarpur Corridor was inaugurated as part of the celebrations for the 550th birth anniversary of Guru Nanak. The bridge allows Indian pilgrims direct access to Gurdwara Kartarpur Sahib in Pakistan, and was inaugurated by the prime ministers of the two countries. The founder of the Sikh faith is best known for his sermon of 'Ek Onkar (God is One), satnam (his name is truth), Karta Purak (he is the creator), nirbhau (he is without fear), nirvair (he is not inimical to anyone), akal moorat (he is timeless), ajooni (he is beyond birth), saibhang (self-illuminated)." During his life, when the Sikh guru saw the rising religious conflict between Hindus and Muslims, Nanak said, "Na koi Hindu/ Na koi Musalman// Sab rab de bande // (No on is Hindu or Muslim, we are all god's people)."

CALLING NEW INDIA Prime Minister Narendra Modi addresses the nation on the day of the Ayodhya verdict. (Photo: ANI)

The way forward for Hindus and Muslims, therefore, is for both communities to acknowledge the wrongs committed and to decide not to fall into the same trap again. As the Supreme Court said, there was merit in the evidence that the Hindu community had for over 300 years regarded the site, which the Babri Masjid partially occupied, as the birthplace of their revered deity and exercised partial possession of it. Over the years, the site has become as sacred to many Hindus as Mecca is to the Muslims. At some point before the dispute went out of hand, both communities should have worked out an amicable solution similar to what the court had decided: that the Hindu organisations get to build a Ram temple in the place they believed to be sacred, and for communal amity the masjid be dismantled and shifted to a mutually agreed site in Ayodhya. That we didn't do so is a failure of both politics and civil society.

The Hindu votaries of a Ram mandir should also take heed of the Supreme Court's assertion that the surreptitious break-in and installation of the Ram Lalla idol in 1949 aided by a compliant local administration was a wrongful act and a "desecration" of the mosque. That, in 1986, the then prime minister, Rajiv Gandhi, played a partisan role in getting the magistrate to order the opening of the doors for the worship of the idol and later, in 1989, allowing Hindu organisations to perform the shilanyas (foundation stone ceremony) for the Ram Mandir. These groups should also take heed of the court's stern language in describing the demolition of the Babri Masjid in 1992 as "an egregious violation of the rule of law". It may be difficult, however, to get the organisations and individuals who indulged in such illegal acts to acknowledge their wrongs. We will have to rely on the judiciary again to deliver appropriate justice to those accused of the demolition, including some of the BJP's tallest leaders, if it finds them guilty. For that is the only way to demonstrate, particularly to the Muslim community, that no illegal act will go unpunished, however powerful the individual, group or cause behind it. That the rule of law must prevail if faith in the independence of the judiciary and the Constitution is to be upheld. For the idea of India to prevail.

The good sign is that India showed it was ready to move on with peace prevailing across the country after the verdict was pronounced. Credit goes to Prime Minister Modi, Union home minister Amit Shah and RSS chief Mohan Bhagwat, who had cautioned Hindu organisations and civil society against indulging in triumphalism. And to Muslim leaders, many of whom were unhappy with the verdict, but appealed to the community to remain calm. This is the spirit with which the country should move forward. Importantly, the apex court in its judgment made a categorical assertion that the provisions of the 1991 Places of Worship Act should be observed by all. The Act prohibits the conversion of any place of worship, except Ayo­dhya, as the matter was sub judice then, and insists on the maintenance of any place of worship as it existed on Aug­ust 15, 1947. It is a clear warning to Hindu organisations that may nurture ambitions of starting similar movements to have mosques abutting temples in Varanasi and Mathura shifted.

Importantly, as Swami Vivekananda, a mentor for the Sangh parivar, observed, religion alone cannot be the sine qua non for a nation to succeed. It cannot be preached to an empty stomach. As Swami Vivekananda put it, "Whenever any religion succeeds, it must have economic value. Thousands of similar sects will be struggling for power, but only those who meet the real economic problems will have it. Man is guided by the stomach. He walks, and the stomach goes first, and the head afterwards." Modi was right to appeal, after the verdict, for India to focus on development and build a new nation. The economy is in the grip of a severe slowdown and it will need the focused energies of the government and people to pull it out of the slump. We can ill afford to indulge in another round of muscular religious assertion.

Even as we observe the 150th birth anniversary of the Father of the Nation, we should remember Mahatma Gandhi's views on religion. He said: "For me, humanitarian service, or rather service of all that lives, is religion. And I draw no dist­inction between such religion and politics." Gandhi regarded Ram "as the all-powerful essence whose name, inscribed in the heart, removes all suffering mental, moral and physical". When the assassin's bullet struck him, his last cry was 'Hey Ram' before he collapsed and died. As we move forward, this great nation has to uphold the values and principles that were dear to Ram and the founding father. That alone would usher in true Ram Rajya.
