Top Court Trashes ED Plea Against DK Shivakumar's Bail, Says 'This Isn't How You Treat Your Citizens'

New Delhi:

In a major relief for senior Congress leader DK Shivakumar, the Supreme Court on Friday junked the Enforcement Directorate appeal against grant of bail to the Karnataka leader. The top court rebuked the Enforcement Directorate, saying this ‘isn't how you treat your citizens.’ Shivakumar was released from Tihar Jail on October 23 after he was granted bail by the Delhi High Court. Shivakumar, is accused in a money laundering case filed by the Enforcement Directorate (ED), was freed on a Rs 25 lakh bail bond. The 57-year-old leader was released following a medical check-up and other formalities, the official added.

Shivakumar was arrested by the ED on September 3 in the money laundering case. He was lodged in Tihar jail under judicial custody and had challenged the trial court’s order denying him bail in the case. Shivakumar, a seven-time MLA in Karnataka, was booked along with Haumanthaiah—an employee at Karnataka Bhavan in New Delhi—and others for alleged offences under the Prevention of Money Laundering Act (PMLA). The case was based on a charge sheet filed by the Income Tax Department against them last year before a special court in Bengaluru on charges of alleged tax evasion and ‘hawala’ transactions worth crores or rupees. The I-T department has accused Shivakumar and his alleged associate S K Sharma of indulging in transactions involving huge amounts of unaccounted money on a regular basis through ‘hawala’ channels with the help of three other accused.

After he returned home from Delhi, Shivakumar had said he was “confident”, “strong” and would fight for justice. The former Minister had also claimed that he has not betrayed anyone at any point of time and would come out with facts and documents regarding the case in the days to come. “If my brother, myself and my family members had gone against the law, I’m ready to accept any punishment... If I have done wrong let them hang me... but I won’t remain silent,” Shivakumar was quoted as saying.

For all the Latest India News, Download News Nation Android and iOS Mobile Apps.
