Majoritarian Justice

For generations in the American South, men of colour were routinely sentenced for life for crimes they never committed-particularly if they were accused of the rape or murder of a white individual. White prosecutors, judges and jury members often admitted that the evidence was incomplete, even contradictory, but they invariably defended their decisions by referring to a broader sense of justice in the community they served: white majority society.

The pages of the Supreme Court of India's verdict on the disputed site of the Babri Masjid have a strong whiff of a similar interpretation of the emotions of a putative Hindu majority. The voluminous evidence of the use of the disputed area going back eight centuries does not quite add up to a clear-cut conclusion and there are many contradictions in the longer story, including the blatant violations of the law, that generated this dispute in the first place. Nonetheless, the court ruled 'on the balance of probabilities', that the 'claim of the Hindus' has more validity than that of the Muslims. Throughout the verdict, the judges scrupulously invoke constitutional principles, 'facts and evidence' of all kinds but at the end it all comes down to which of the parties can be said to have established a record on 'unimpeded use' of the site.

The court notes that the 'unimpeded use' of the site by Muslims was made impossible by two illegal acts, the installation of the Ramlalla idols in the Babri Masjid in 1949 and the destruction of the structure in 1992. Nonetheless, this lapse in 'unimpeded use' of 70 years is then turned into evidence that weighs against the Muslim claims to the area. This crucial move, akin to 'blaming the victim', means that the verdict probably will never enter the hall of fame of great jurisprudence. Instead, it is a very clear example of a court acting in accordance with an interpretation of the sense of justice in the community which the court sees itself as serving. Who, and what, is this community?

First of all, a newly re-elected majority government and its vast army of supporters and activists have risen to power and political majority since the 1980s by claiming that the disputed site is indeed the birthplace of Lord Ram, a site deliberately violated by Muslims by building the Babri Masjid. This, they claim, is an emotional truth impervious to any verifiable fact, such as the Archaeological Survey of India (ASI) finding that there was no proof that Babri Masjid was constructed on top of a demolished Hindu temple.

Secondly, the court deploys a putative category called 'Hindus' throughout the verdict. It is as if the local groups that the conquering Brits allowed to use the outer courtyard of the complex after 1856, the activists who installed the idols in the mosque in 1949 and the multiple RSS affiliates who have been milling around the site since the 1980s, represent a genuine and general 'Hindu' interest, let alone a majority opinion. Anyone who has followed the evolution of the RSS and its organisations will know that they seek affirmation as the authentic representative of Hindus everywhere. Now, this claim will be seen by many to have acquired legal ratification.

Finally, the court explicitly considered the maintenance of 'public peace and tranquility' in its deliberations. The deployment of thousands of security personnel signalled that the government would take no chances. However, the real threat to public order in this protracted dispute has never come from members of the minority community. In this case, the verifiable threats are from those well-organised militant Hindu groupings who instigated the dispute in 1949, those who destroyed the Babri Masjid and went on to campaign for the building of a temple on this site. Faced with the very real threat of large-scale violence from these groups, tightly aligned with the government, the court has conceded the entire disputed area to those who claim to represent 'the Hindus'.

Defenders of the verdict will point out that a measure of interpretation of the public mood and political expediency is inevitable in cases where the political stakes are high. They may even claim that the verdict is a pragmatic and fair decision that can provide closure to all by solving the land issue while admitting that the Muslim community was wronged in some respects, and directing the government to provide land for the construction of a mosque nearby. However, this seems to be a rather peculiar form of 'winner-takes-all' majoritarian justice with some feel good (but cheap) reparations thrown in to assuage the hurt feelings of the Muslim community.

The Supreme Court's 2019 interpretation of justice explicitly takes aim at the Allahabad High Court verdict in 2010 as inadequately guaranteeing 'public peace and tranquility'. This verdict represented another attempt at interpreting a broader sense of justice, albeit deploying a more conventional secular logic of balancing community claims against each other. The verdict resolved to divide the disputed 2.77 acre area into three parts: the central dome, where activists had installed idols in 1949, would go to 'Hindus' on the ground that they believed this to be the exact birth place of Lord Ram (although a claim of recent historical origin); the outer courtyard where various groups of Hindus have worshipped for centuries would go to the local Nirmohi Akhara; and the rest to the Waqf Board of Uttar Pradesh.

Although cautious in some respects, the 2010 verdict paved the way for this week's verdict of the apex court. It acknowledged that creating 'facts on the ground' by breaking multiple laws in 1949 and destroying a mosque in 1992 could over time become evidence of an authentic religious emotion that can be considered legitimate. So how would this be an inadequate guarantee of communal peace? Because it did not satisfy the Hindutva activists who claimed nothing short of the entire area and who had demonstrated again and again, their willingness to engage in violence and public disturbance to reach this goal.

Across India, there are thousands of sites that have been used by both Muslims and Hindus for centuries. There is little to stop local Hindutva activists from following the playbook of Ayodhya: to claim authentic ownership of such sites by desecration and installation of Hindu idols in Muslim structures, converting them to sites that can be claimed as important to the emotions of Hindus. Teesta Setalvad and her colleagues have already found evidence of extensive lists of such sites circulating among Hindutva activists.

The Supreme Court has potentially founded a new peculiar branch of majoritarian jurisprudence wherein evidence of religious and political passion, adherence to 'emotional truths' among Hindus and the attendant threat to 'public peace and tranquility' overrides old-fashioned verifiable historical and legal facts.

(Thomas Blom Hansen is professor and chair of the department of anthropology, Stanford University and author of several books, among them The Saffron Wave: Democracy and Hindu Nationalism in Modern India (1999), Wages of Violence: Naming and Identity in Postcolonial Bombay (2001) and, most recently, Majoritarian State: How Hindu Nationalism is Changing India (2019).)
