Notes from the 560: Rebel’s Day Out

Magal

Mahatma Gandhi

Bhagat Singh

Karnataka

Bangalore Mirror

By AdityaBeing a rebel is not easy. It requires a firm sense of conviction to go against the grain or conventional wisdom to do what one truly believes is the best course of action. Up until Independence, India’s pioneering rebels were led byhimself. Others like Subhash Chandra Bose andmake up that extensive list of countless heroes. You find rebels in every profession and discipline you can think of. Generally the word is associated with a positive meaning and indicates a person or people triggering momentous change.Infor the past few months, the word ‘rebel’ has most often been used to describe the actions of 17 MLAs who resigned from their party memberships in the Congress –JD(S) combine and have now manoeuvred their way into the BJP. The Supreme Court upheld their disqualification this week but did not impose restrictions on them contesting elections in the scheduled by-polls during the first week of December.’s coverage on this never ending drama I’m sure has kept all of you abreast of the details.These rebels should be appreciated because they’ve pioneered a movement where sitting MLAs can resign from their party memberships and cause the fall of a government. They can then re-stand on bypoll tickets in elections their own actions have caused! It’s a brilliant strategy and now that even the Supreme Court has okayed it, it’s a precedent that I’m sure we’ll see all across India’s legislatures.1. Making a choice between flying out on a private chartered plane or a first class commercial airline on the day of defection is very difficult. Having to sit in an air-conditioned environment and be masqueraded by air –hostesses whilst chomping on mile high meals and drinks is laborious work for a rebel especially when the ex-chequer is footing the bill in some way or the other.2. Choosing to be confined to a 6-star resort or a 7-star resort is the hardest choice a rebel MLA has to make. Questions like choosing a king-sized bed or a beach-view room factor a lot into these decisions. As for food choices, let’s not even grapple with those because choosing what type of room service a rebel wants to have is one hard questions to deal with.3. Rebels have to deal with the burden of accommodation. I’m not taking resort accommodation. Several factions come to the fore and this leads to more and more deputys and ministership. Karnataka’s rebels have to be congratulated because their actions have led to the first time a state has had 3 deputy chief ministers. At a time when the economy is struggling, rebels are fighting unemployment by creating job openings for ministerships!4. Hundreds of party workers, twitter trolls and campaign managers are employed because of bypolls. This is good income at a time when the economy is struggling. Thanks again to the rebels. It’s still your tax money that goes into holding bypolls but that’s of little consequence.5. Finally, it’s a win-win. Rebels are paid in crores to break away from their party. If they win the election then they continue to make money. If they lose they still have their defection fund. It’s a true win-win.So the next time you are thinking of a career change or have to advise someone on what profession to take up, tell them to become a professional rebel. Nothing works out better!
