Amid lockdown, rains, snowfall add to miseries of Occupied Kashmir people

Amid lockdown, rains, snowfall add to miseries of Occupied Kashmir people

In occupied Kashmir, the increasing chill after fresh rains and snowfall has added to the miseries of people of Kashmir Valley who have already been suffering immensely due to strict military siege since 5th of August.

Due to continued lockdown, people have more difficulties to face in the coming days as they have not been able to stock essential commodities for the harsh winter as the only surface link of territory remains closed for months.

The situation in Kashmir Valley and Muslim majority areas of Jammu and Ladakh regions was far from the normal for 104th consecutive day, today.

There is no let up in the restrictions imposed under Section 144 in the territory amid massive deployment of Indian troops.

The ban on internet, text messaging and prepaid mobile connections remains in force.

The residents of Valley continue to show their resentment against New Delhi by observing civil disobedience over its anti-Kashmir moves.

As part of this movement, the shopkeepers keep their shops closed in most part of the day while students are not attending the educational institutions. The offices are also witnessing a very thin attendance.

Srinagar-Jammu Highway remained closed for the 3rd day, today, due to snowfall and landslides at various places.

Meanwhile, Human Rights Watch’s Asia Advocacy Director, John Sifton has expressed serious concern over prevailing grim situation in occupied Kashmir.

In a written submission to Tom Lantos Human Rights Commission, John Sifton said human rights are under threat in Kashmir.

He said Members of Congress should communicate to Indian government officials that their actions in Kashmir are adding to human rights problems.

He said Congress Members should insist that political leaders and others arbitrarily detained Kashmiris are released, restrictions on communications are lifted, and independent observers, including diplomats, foreign journalists and rights activists are allowed to travel freely to Kashmir.

Similarly, speakers at a seminar organized by Pakistani High Commission in London expressed deep concern over continued siege of eight million Kashmiris and worsening humanitarian crisis in occupied Kashmir.

The speakers included Pakistan’s High Commissioner to UK, Mohammad Nafees Zakaria, Dr Syed Nazir Gilani, Ben Emmerson QC, Anthea McIntyre, Professor Nazir Ahmed Shawl, Ms Uzma Rasool and Mrs Sahmim Shawl.

On the other hand, Indian Central Bureau of Investigation raided Bengaluru and New Delhi offices of human rights group Amnesty International India.

Reacting to CBI’s action, Amnesty International India said that the organization was being targeted for speaking out against human rights violations in the country.

NNR/Abid
