UP Minister Swati Singh Summoned By Yogi Adityanath After Audio Threatening Cop Surfaces

Yogi Adityanath has Swati Singh, minister from Uttar Pradesh over viral audio clip.

Uttar Pradesh Chief Minister Yogi Adityanath on Saturday summoned state minister Swati Singh after a purported audio clip of her threatening a police officer in Lucknow went viral, news agency ANI reported. NDTV cannot independently verify the authenticity of the audio.

The Chief Minister has also asked for a report from the Director-General of Police in 24 hours. The police, however, are yet to verify the authenticity of the audio.

In the audio clip that has surfaced on social media, UP Minister Swati Singh is heard questioning Circle Officer of Lucknow Cant Beenu Singh about an FIR filed against Ansal Developers and expressing displeasure over it.

In the said audio, the minister alleges that "fake cases" were being filed against the company.

She is also heard saying that it is a high-profile case and the Chief Minister is aware of it.

"It's false. Close the case," Swati Singh is heard saying, asking the officer to visit her office "if she wants to continue".

She is heard asking the police officer to sit down with her to resolve the matter if she wanted to continue working.

Opposition parties including Samajwadi Party and Congress have attacked the Yogi government over the minister issuing threats to the police officer.

"The matter is high profile and is under the cognizance of the Chief Minister. What inquiry will you do? Come and sit down" is this the zero tolerance for corruption which the Chief Minister is not tired of speaking about? Shame!," Samajwadi Party said in a tweet quoting the conversation between the minister and the circle officer.

Uttar Pradesh Congress Committee president Ajay Kumar Lallu, in a separate tweet, said, "UP minister is threatening the Lucknow Cant Circle Officer in favour of scamster Ansal Builder. Madam minister is saying this matter is in the know of the CM sahab (sir), there are orders from above that there should be no FIR in this case. See the hold of scamsters under BJP government, how the minister is threatening the guardians of law."

On September 29, Vice Chairman of real estate group Ansal API's Vice Chairman Pranav Ansal was detained from the Delhi Airport in connection with criminal breach of trust, cheating, and forgery.

(With inputs from ANI, PTI)
