JNU: It's not about freebies, it's about freedom

Deewarein bol uthi hain

Daag ache hain

In JNU , the walls always spoke. And the tongue was political. Arty, hand-painted posters screamed, Free Nelson Mandela, and quoted Faiz Ahmed Faiz's poetry. A generation of students came, and left. But the walls, sputtering words of resistance, remained a constant.In recent months, however, the walls lost their voice. When students planned a protest in July, the JNU administration even issued a circular asking them to "strictly abide" by the provision of Delhi Prevention of Defacement of Property Act, 2007, and the decision of a JNU executive council meeting in March 2018. The violators were liable for "action/penalty."Last Wednesday, the walls and doors of JNU's administrative block found their voice again. Even the building's interiors were reclaimed in an anarchic release of expression allegedly by agitating students. "(The walls have spoken again), said one graffiti. Another cheekily said, "." On a clock was written in bold red, Time4Revolution.The outburst came after a fortnight-long stand-off between students and authorities on a proposed hike in hostel fees. Students calculate that the raise could cause an estimated Rs 3,000 or more jump in their monthly expenses. "About 40% students in 2017-18 had Rs 12,000 per month or less family income. The fee hike will hurt the disadvantaged students most," says Satish Chandra Yadav, general secretary of the student's union ( JNUSU ).The authorities have since offered "a partial rollback" which has been rejected by JNUSU. But talking to students and teachers - and going through the interviews and statements of JNU VC M Jagadesh Kumar - one gathers that this is much more than a students' protest for a better hostel deal. At the heart of the conflict lies the sharp divergence in the ideological and administrative vision of what JNU should be, with the VC on one side, and the students and teachers on the other.Founded in 1969, JNU has always been Left-aligned, both academically and in student politics. But the campus culture has always been overwhelmingly liberal. Irreverence to state power and social norms has been at its political and cultural centre. Unlike other places in India, JNU's politics was marked by a civility, except for occasional events like the turbulent 1983 student movement. Debates were always verbal and political exchanges conducted through cyclostyled pamphlets, available like condiments at breakfast and dinner. Elections, conducted by the students themselves, were fought between the CPM-backed SFI and the campus-based Free Thinkers.In recent years, campus politics has turned more combative verbally, and the debates shriller. CPML's student wing, AISA, has become a formidable force; while the Right has made substantial inroads with ABVP. The campus, nonetheless, retains a liberal spirit. Knowledge-acquisition in dhabas continue to be part of the unofficial curriculum. "Queers against Fascists" read one graffiti during the ongoing protest.This then seems a larger battle for individual and cultural freedoms. Specific points of conflicts include sharply differing positions between administration and student/teachers on dress codes, hostel rules and dhaba timings.In recent years, barring Ganga dhaba, all other eateries have been asked to down shutters by 11pm. Even 24x7, open all night, was asked to obey the diktat. During the ongoing protest, students restarted a "Guerrilla Dhaba" serving tea and coffee late into the night.An official circular threatened students with "eviction" if they were not back in the rooms by 11pm. "It is as if the administration wants to keep every student indoors," says NSUI's Hrushikesh Behera. Part of the administration's outreach has been to withdraw this provision. The hostel manual clause that required students to be 'appropriately dressed' in mess rooms was also removed. Yadav feels these were attempts at "moral policing". DK Lobiyal, president of the university's teacher association, JNUTA, says that the VC seems to believe that if you don't dress or behave in a certain way, you are not a good citizen. In 2017, the VC asked the government to install tanks in the university to instill nationalism and patriotism among students. Questions sent to JNU VC and PRO received no reply till the time of filing of this report surveillance cameras were installed in hostels in 2017. PhD student Shabnam Sircaik recalls an incident when a guard approached six students chatting on Lohit Lawns around 11pm. "He asked us to break up the gathering saying it was against the law. They want to discipline us," she says.Students TOI spoke to seemed wary of administrative action if they spoke up. Barring some office-bearers, several refused to be named for this report. Demonstrations are often video recorded. "A faculty member advised me, "Kuch bhi ho, camera mein mat aana (Whatever happens, don't come in front of the camera)," says PhD student Shivani Ror.Kumar took charge shortly before the controversial February 9, 2016 incident when anti-national slogans were shouted in the campus. A sedition case was filed against several students, including the then JNUSU president Kanhaiya Kumar , and the hashtag, ShutDownJNU, trended on Twitter. JNUSU feels the ongoing war dates back to that time. "The idea to defame JNU didn't succeed. But there have been fragmented attacks ever since to change the university's character of social justice and inclusion," says Yadav.The VC's administrative initiatives include establishing schools of engineering, management and entrepreneurship. "The university derives its basic character from the social sciences. The VC wants to convert it into a professional courses university," says Lobiyal.JNU's alumni currently includes two Cabinet ministers - foreign minister S Jaishankar, who post-graduated in political science, and finance minister Nirmala Sitharaman, who earned a master's in economics. So did Abhijit Banerjee, 2019 Nobel Prize winner.But despite that reputation, rancour rules. "If they continue to protest after these concessions, I believe that their motive is not this but something else," Kumar told a TV channel.At Freedom Square, the ground zero of protests, JNUSU continues to agitate. With the semester heading for an end and no solution in sight, the confrontation is beginning to look like a duel on the Titanic.
