Doc-path lab nexus: Police suspect much bigger scam

Cap

Vadodara: Jaimin Shah, a quack who had been running a racket of fake medical test reports from his laboratory, Swara Pathology Lab, at Vadu in Padra taluka is still evading arrest.

However, police suspect a bigger nexus in the scandal even as Shah was booked for cheating, endangering lives and under the Gujarat Medical Practice Act based on the complaint submitted by the health department.

The health department submitted a complaint against Shah after taking statement of one Dr Sunil Surve, who Shah claimed authorized the fake reports. Surve, however, denied having anything to do with the pathology department or ever signing any of those reports before the health department.

“We are in process of collecting evidence against Shah and whoever else was involved in this scam. The FIR that has been registered is based on statements of Shah and Dr Surve taken by the health department,” said sub-inspector J A Barot of Vadu police station. Barot added that they will be calling, both, Shah and Surve for their statements again.

In the investigation so far, police have found papers from the sealed laboratory which are believed to have been signed by Surve. Police said that if they find concrete evidence against Surve, he too will be made a co-accused and arrested.

The cops have asked Surve to appear for a statement again on Monday.

“There is a possibility that there could be more people involved but there will be clarity after interrogation,” added Barot.

The laboratory was sealed on November 11 when after an audio clip of a telephonic conversation in which the laboratory was promising to prepare concocted reports surfaced. In the viral audio clip, the caller identifying himself as Sachin Joshi is heard saying,

“If you want blood report showing malaria, typhoid or whichever disease, I can prepare it for you.” He also promised the doctor 40 per cent commission and offers to provide him the price list of tests.

On November 14, Shah himself appeared before the health department to give his statement where he named Surve. Over the weekend Surve’s testimony was taken wherein he denied charges.


