Why India is facing a huge blood crisis

India relies heavily on transfusions due to a higher prevalence of blood-borne diseases and complications during pregnancy. (Image for representation)

They were the most difficult six hours of Meenakshi Sharma's life. The MNC executive scrambled to arrange blood needed for her boy's complex surgery at a prominent hospital in Delhi.

"We almost lost him. My husband somehow managed supplies from a private blood bank in the city in the nick of time," said the 40-year-old. It was a happy ending. But there are thousands in the country who aren't as fortunate as Sharma's child.

India has the world's largest shortage of blood, with all states together battling a huge shortfall of 41 million units and demand outstripping supply by over 400%, says the first of its kind study published in the journal The Lancet. And demand is rising, says the findings. The overall global shortfall is 100 million units.

The crisis has crippled life-saving transfusions that save thousands of lives each year and replace blood that is lost through surgery or injury or provide it if the body is not making blood properly.

WHY SO MUCH BLOOD IS NEEDED

Patients may need a blood transfusion if they have anaemia, sickle cell disease, a bleeding disorder such as hemophilia, or cancer. A cancer patient, on an average, needs at least 100 units of blood.

There are patients who come to AIIMS from other states. It is difficult for them to arrange for blood when they are in a place they don’t know. Naturally,they look towards blood banks. AIIMS has 4 blood banks and we try to be adequately stocked,but even we often have to struggle.Hence, voluntary donations are essential. - A senior resident doctor, AIIMS

India relies heavily on transfusions due to a higher prevalence of blood-borne diseases and complications during pregnancy.

About 60 million traumainduced surgeries are performed in the country every year. It is a witness to more than 1,200 road crashes every day.

The 230 million major operations, 331 million cancer-related procedures like chemotherapy and 10 million pregnancy complications require blood transfusion.

WHY THE CRISIS

Experts say myths around blood donation are a major hurdle. "We often meet people who think donating blood reduces masculinity in males, and female blood donors are very few. Therefore, in case of malignancy, due to repeated requirements, those who donate blood are exhausted," said a doctor from a prominent cancer hospital in Delhi.

Many myths circle around women donating blood. "Women feel they cannot donate blood, it makes their immune system weak. Besides, menstruation is seen as an unnecessary issue. Generally, women have low haemoglobin, also one of the reasons they stay away from blood donations," said Dr Pragya Shukla.

"However, women can naturally survive in lower haemoglobin levels. Unless they are pregnant, lactating, anaemic, or suffering from some medical issue that lowers haemoglobin, they can donate blood."

THE PAYMENT BAN BANE

Doctors also consider the ban on payment to blood donors as an Achilles' heel. Earlier, almost one-third of the blood supply was from paid donors. But with the ban, both private and government hospitals have suffered. However, the ban has also prevented unsafe blood donations.

We often meet people who think donating blood reduces masculinity in males,and female blood donors are very few.Therefore,in case of malignancy,due to repeated requirements,those who donate blood are exhausted.

People contaminated with communicable diseases appeared for paid donations very frequently.

"There are patients who come to AIIMS from other states. It is difficult for them to arrange for blood when they are in a place they don't know. Naturally, they look towards blood banks. AIIMS has 4 blood banks under it and we try to be adequately stocked, but even we often have to struggle. Hence, voluntary donations are essential," said an AIIMS senior resident doctor.

IDEAL SITUATION

The WHO recommends that for every 1,000 people in any country, a target of 10-20 donors is needed to provide adequate supplies. As per government data, 34 per 1,000 eligible people must donate blood once in a year to address the estimated clinical demand. The proportion can be reduced in the event of promotion of repeat voluntary non-remunerated blood donation.

The country needs to collect 20.3 units of whole blood per occupied bed to address the population need and 11.17 units of whole blood per occupied bed to address the annual clinical demand.

Women feel they cannot donate blood, it makes their immune system weak.Besides, menstruation is seen as an unnecessary issue.Generally, women have low haemoglobin,also one of the reasons they stay away from blood donations. - Dr Pragya Shukla

STATE-WISE SCENARIO

In 2016, while 16 states and UTs faced a shortage of blood supply, 18 had an excess of it. Generally, Maharashtra, Punjab and Kerala are the best performers in blood donation, with each state having an excess of blood supply of more than 35%. States like Sikkim, who initially faced a shortfall, had increased availability by 22%, leading to a surplus of 4%.

However, sadly, incidents of wastage of blood units collected are frequent to happen in such states. Shelf life of collected blood is only 30-45 days, which means excess of blood needs to be soon sent to all needy areas.

On the other end of the scale are poor performing states like Chhattisgarh, Arunachal Pradesh, Uttar Pradesh and Meghalaya who have struggled to meet their blood requirements by more than 50%.

HOW TO FIX IT

"A lot of blood goes waste due to poor infra. More investment needs to be made to expand national transfusion services, blood management systems, and alternatives to blood transfusions," said a health ministry official.

"There is a large unmet need for more government support, financially, structurally, and through establishment of a regulatory oversight to ensure supply, quality, and safety," he said.

AIIMS organised flash mobs in Delhi's prominent locations that led to an increase in people wanting to donate blood for an urgent and noble cause, said doctors. NGOs such as Save Life Foundation, Red Cross, Rotary Club as well as active civil society members come out and actively donate blood.

THE GLOBAL SCENE

The report showed 119 out of 196 countries - mainly in Africa, Oceania and South Asia - do not have enough supply to meet hospital demands.

Those nations combined are more than 100 million units of blood short of WHO targets. They are all middle-to-low income. The WHO recommends countries have at least 10 donations per 1,000 people.
