How is revenge best served?

Narendra Modi

Amit Shah

Robert Vadra

Brahmastra

Richard Nixon

ByCold or hot? In politics, the palate responds in unforeseen ways.It might be happenstance. Shortly after the Shiv Sena became estranged from the BJP, the IT department swooped down on civic contractors working for the BMC and claimed to have detected irregularities of a whopping Rs 735 crore. The belief was the IT strike - which never happened in the years that the cash-rich BMC was controlled by the BJP and Sena - was intended to faze Uddhav Thackeray and warn him of the consequences of hobnobbing with an anti-BJP coalition. Far from being daunted, the Sena chief's resolve to align with the Congress and the NCP and thumb his nose at the BJP grew stronger to the point that he cast off the security and comfort of being part of a majority dispensation with the BJP for the uncertainty of hanging out with apparently inconsonant parties.If the IT raiders were stopped in their tracks, it was because the buck might eventually have stopped on the BJP's door because it had forged a forced partnership with the Sena, after the last BMC election threw up an inconclusive verdict and jointly ran its affairs. Uddhav must have smirked when a similar clampdown on Sharad Pawar before the assembly polls regenerated a down-and-out NCP. A brush whose bristles, ferrule and handle were soaked in black from painting and tainting the Congress as "venal" could not tar the old warrior from Baramati.Revenge is an unknown quantity in politics. It can be an upsetter or a galvaniser. Who better knows this than Prime Ministerand Home Minister? In its second term, the UPA expended much time, energy and resources, arraigning Shah, who was a home minister in Modi's Gujarat government, for encounter killings in the state. A Gujarat bureaucrat said while the Congress displayed remarkable acuity in targeting and nailing Shah, who by then was known as Modi's "Chanakya", his principal strategist and dynamo, the Congress couldn't pull off the feat it set out to do. Shah was arrested and banished from Gujarat for two years but he returned a hotshot, with his own fandom. Shah's ex post facto explanation for the Congress bungle was it didn't use the CBI "professionally" but "politically". "They did everything possible to trap me," he said at that time.Is revenge best served cold or hot? In its first term, the Modi government went about the project dispassionately. From time to time, there were indications that the law was about to close in onbut nothing tangible followed. It helped the BJP to keep its discourse against the Congress's "unscrupulousness" and "corruptibility" going to the point that the Gandhis failed to upend Modi. Recall what a lemon Rahul Gandhi's Rafale campaign was. It was as though people thought it blasphemous to couple the BJP with corruption.A second and a surer mandate tempted the BJP to serve the dish hot. Everyone was fair game to the point that its own allies became insecure, wondering when they would get on the hit list of the investigative agencies. It's not for nothing that the Sena reckoned that a parting was in order. The NDA has come apart in Jharkhand three weeks before the polls. What will the BJP do? Probe the conduct of the All Jharkhand Students' Union, its former ally?Unfortunately for the BJP and mercifully for the AJSU, its lone minister in the Raghubar Das government, Chandra Prakash Choudhary, resigned from the state cabinet on being elected a Lok Sabha member while the AJSU didn't replace him. From his Patna perch, Nitish Kumar must be watching Maharashtra, disconcerted perhaps because who knows what arm-twisting he will be subject to next year, before the Bihar polls?Browbeating and intimidation are the most easily availableat a ruler's disposal to break and vanquish political rivals. But the arsenal can run dry. Getting after P Chidambaram was unlikely to have political ramifications because despite being a big leaguer in Delhi, Chidambaram does not have much of a mass base back home in Tamil Nadu to rally around him. DK Shivakumar is another kettle of fish because he's a caste leader in Karnataka and an organiser par excellence. Shivakumar's release from prison before the crucial Karnataka by-polls is not good news for the BJP.The rules call for subtlety and style. Nobody accomplished it with more elan than YS Jaganmohan Reddy. He and his mother, Vijayalakshmi, were humiliated by the Congress brass after YS Rajasekhara Reddy's death. Jagan was jailed for alleged malfeasance when the UPA was in power because he defied the "high command". He waited for his time, struck at the Congress, and how! Jagan made sure the Congress doesn't exist in Andhra Pradesh.and his administration infamously used the federal machinery against their opponents. In his speech resigning the presidency, Nixon made absolutely no admission of wrongdoing. Yet at the end of his career, "Always remember: Others may hate you, but those who hate you don't win unless you hate them, and then you destroy yourself."
