This Pune Sanitation Worker Made A Parody Of 'Kajra Mohabbat Wala' To Give Out The Message Of Cleanliness

Poor waste disposal and management is scourge in cities across India, and despite multiple awareness campaigns, including the Swachh Bharat scheme, things have not changed significantly.

People continue to use plastic despite bans and streets are strewn with garbage. In a bid to spread the word on cleanliness, a Pune sanitation worker has come up with rather unique idea.

Twitter

Mahadev Jadhav, a sanitation worker from Pune, gave a unique twist to the famous Bollywood song 'Kajra Mohabbat wala', and turned it into a parody about plastic use, waste disposal and the lack of initiative among citizens.

Environmentalists, climate change activists, and the government are doing their bit to best inform people about the repercussions of poor cleanliness sensibilities, but progress on this front is slow.

But people like Jadhav are doing their bit to make people aware of cleanliness and the importance of waste management

#WATCH Pune: Mahadev Jadhav, a sanitation worker who has been working with the Pune Municipal Corporation for 25 years creates awareness about cleanliness and waste disposal, through songs. (17.11) #Maharashtra pic.twitter.com/udCRMy9Cmu — ANI (@ANI) November 17, 2019

“No one asked me to sing, I sing so I can reach out to people…to create awareness among people as to where to put dry and wet waste, so the Corporation and the people can work together to solve the problem,” Mahadev told The Indian Express.

Picture For Representation/ANI

"Recently a video of me singing went viral. I had gone to a seminar where I sang a song and it became viral. I have been working for the past 25 years, but the changes have definitely come now, almost 60 percent of the people understand and follow rules now," he added.

Reports state that apart from being a sanitation worker, Jadhav himself has composed different songs on cleaning, which he sings in front of people every day in the morning, while separating wet and dry garbage.

Listen to this champ from Pune Muncipal Corporation who not only collects your waste everyday but also promotes cleanliness drive with his own songs and beautiful voice across city. Mahadev Jadhav is a sanitation worker working with @PMCPune. #Pune @swachhbharat #Maharashtra pic.twitter.com/HPFE0DzruK — Ali shaikh (@alishaikh3310) November 17, 2019

Jadhav says that the perception of people towards waste disposal is changing now, and we can bet his songs and the message he puts across, have something to do with it.

Maharashtra is among the 23 states that have fully or partially banned plastic bags.

Reuters

The government of Maharashtra declared to ban single-use plastic in Pune on March 23, 2018. Back then, the Environment Minister, Ramdas Kadam, announced a state-wide ban on plastic items such as plastic bags and disposable plastic products – spoons, forks, cups, plates, glasses, bowls, and containers.

Yet, people have continued to use plastic products; even the hefty fines that were imposed after the ban didn't make a difference. What's even more shocking is that the Maharashtra government was actually considering a roll-back on the ban the same year.

The pressure allegedly came from traders and the general public who were struggling to adjust their daily lives, a scenario that hasn't changed even now. People like Jadav are doing their bit to sensitize people towards waste disposal and cleanliness, it's time we do our bit too.
