Sanitation workers in 9 countries including Bangladesh suffer terrible working conditions

Millions of sanitation workers in many countries around the world including Bangladesh are forced to work in conditions that endanger their health and lives.

In Bangladesh, there are an estimated 5 million to 6 million sweepers, who despite providing an essential public service, are often the most marginalised, poor and discriminated against members of society who carry out their jobs with no equipment, protection or legal rights, often violating their dignity and human rights.

The report was jointly authored by the International Labour Organisation, WaterAid, World Bank and World Health Organization to raise awareness of the de-humanising working conditions and to push for change, said a press release sent by WaterAid Bangladesh.

Sanitation workers are the men and women who work at any part of the long sanitation chain that begins when we go to the toilet and ends when waste is disposed of or reused.

Their jobs can include cleaning toilets, emptying pits and septic tanks, cleaning sewers and manholes and operating pumping stations and treatment plants.

Workers often come into direct contact with human waste, working with no equipment or protection which exposes them to a wide variety of health hazards and disease.

Toxic gases, such as ammonia, carbon monoxide and sulphur dioxide in septic tanks and sewers can cause workers to lose consciousness or die.

The work is often informal with workers subject to no rights or social protections.

Pay can be inconsistent or non-existent – some workers report being paid in food rather than money.

In some countries, sanitation work is a socially stigmatising issue, so workers often work at night to hide their job from their communities.

Tim Wainwright, CEO of WaterAid, said: “Everyone goes to the toilet and everyone is put at risk of deadly waterborne disease if the waste is not properly dealt with. Sanitation workers therefore carry out some of the most important roles in any society.

It is shocking therefore that sanitation workers are forced to work in conditions that endanger their health and lives and must cope with stigma and marginalisation, rather than have adequate equipment, recognition and celebration of the life-saving work they carry out.

People are dying every day from both poor sanitation and dangerous working conditions - we cannot allow this to continue.”

Maria Neira, Director of Public Health and Environment at WHO, said: “A fundamental principle of health is “first does no harm”. Sanitation workers make a key contribution to public health around the world – but in so doing, put their own health at risk. This is unacceptable. We must both improve working conditions for these people and strengthen the sanitation workforce, so we can meet global water and sanitation targets.”

Alette Van Leur, Director of the Sectoral Policies Department at the ILO, said: “There is a lack of policies, laws and regulations surrounding sanitation workers, and where they exist, they tend to be weak, covering only certain types of sanitation workers, or lack the required financing or enforcement mechanism.”

Jennifer Sara, Global Director at the World Bank Water Global Practice, said: “The time is now. We need more concerted efforts by all sector actors to come together and improve the quality of the lives of sanitation workers.”

“ This report represents a first step to better understand the various problems facing sanitation workers and identifies actions that can be taken to reverse the current situation in a more consistent fashion.”
