Parliament's Winter Session: Pralhad Joshi Hopes Opposition Will Extend Full Support

Minister of Parliamentary Affairs Pralhad Joshi addressed the media on Monday regarding the ongoing Parliament Session. He voiced hope that the Opposition will extend full support in achieving success in this Winter Session. He spoke favourably about how Parliament was run in the previous session, and expressed hope for the same again.

In the previous Parliament session, everyone has got the credit to run Parliament successfully, especially the Opposition. I have a full hope that Opposition will extend us full support like last time," Pralhad Joshi said.

He added that the Centre is ready to discuss and debate on every topic with the Opposition parties. When Joshi was asked about the Opposition's appeal that former Jammu and Kashmir Chief Minister Farooq Abdullah and former Union Minister P Chidambaram should be allowed to attend the winter session of Parliament, he said that the issue was raised to BJP President Amit Shah. He added that an answer has been given on the same.

"These are judicial concerns. We will see. They have raised the issue and Amit Shah has already given an answer." Joshi said

READ: Winter Session: Opposition raises Farooq Abdullah's detention, demands his participation

Issues to be raised in Delhi Winter Session

As the Winter Session of the Parliament has begun in Delhi, the Opposition parties are all set to corner the Centre over the issues of economic downshift, agrarian distress, unemployment and the proposed Regional Comprehensive Economic Partnership Agreement (RCEP), amongst many others. The opposition leaders may also raise questions against the government on the detention of former J&K Chief Minister Farooq Abdullah, who has been under house arrest since the abrogation of Article 370 in Jammu and Kashmir.

READ: Lok Sabha : Shiv Sena, Congress, TMC file Adjournment motion notices for various reasons

A day prior to the Winter Session on Sunday, Prime Minister Narendra Modi said that he had a wonderful interaction with leaders and Ministers of Parliament across party lines. The PM also said: "We wish to have an open debate on all issues. A high quality of debate is necessary and I hope each one displays their intellectual prowess in contributing to the Parliament. The nectar which is created from this will help in progressing India towards a bright future."

READ: PM Modi: Parliament's winter session will be productive & development oriented

Had a wonderful interaction with leaders and MPs across party lines this evening.



We look forward to a productive Parliament session, where people-centric and development oriented issues would be discussed. pic.twitter.com/EsNze39bSA — Narendra Modi (@narendramodi) November 16, 2019

Citizenship (Amendment) Bill

In the Winter Session, the government aims to pave way for the passage of the Citizenship (Amendment) Bill, which had lapsed in the last Parliament session following the dissolution of the Lok Sabha. Under the bill, the legislation seeks to grant Indian citizenship to Hindus, Sikhs, Jains, Christians, Buddhists and Parsis from Bangladesh, Pakistan and Afghanistan if they have fled their respective country due to religious persecution. The Bill amends the Citizenship Act 1955.

READ: Winter Session of the Parliament begins from Nov 18 | List of Bills likely to be tabled
