Shiv Sena’s Kishori Pednekar to be next mayor; Cong, NCP, BJP decide to not field any candidate

SHIV SENA corporator Kishori Pednekar will be the next mayor of Mumbai. Pednekar filed her nomination on Monday evening after top Sena leaders finalised her name in a closed door meeting. Sena corporator Suhas Wadkar will be named deputy mayor. The new mayor and deputy mayor will be elected on November 22 as the tenure of present mayor Vishwanath Mahadeshwar ends on November 21.

This could be the first time in the BMC, when the Sena will have its mayor and deputy mayor unopposed since the Opposition, Congress and NCP, have not fielded any candidates for both posts.

At a time when Shiv Sena, NCP and Congress are trying to broker a power-sharing arrangement to form the government in the state, the BJP, Sena’s feuding ally and second largest party in the BMC, too seems to have extended an olive branch deciding not to field any candidate.

On Monday evening, fearing backlash from those nursing hopes of becoming mayor, the Sena had kept the new mayor’s name under wraps till Monday evening. Pednekar’s name was announced just an hour ahead of the deadline for nomination. Sena MLC Anil Parab and Mahadeshwar announced Pednekar’s name at a press conference at the BMC head office in CSMT. Senior Sena corporators like Ramakant Rahate, Mangesh Satamkar, Rahul Patel, Anant Nar and Shraddha Jadhav were also contenders for the mayor’s office.

Pednekar, third time corporator, has been elected from Worli and is associated with the Sena since 1992. She was first elected in 2002 and is one of the oldest Shiv Sainiks to have helped the party fortify its base in Worli.

She was also the chairperson of the women and child welfare committee of the BMC. She was praised for her work during Yuva Sena chief Aaditya Thackeray’s election campaign from Worli Assembly constituency and will be the fifth mayor from this constituency.

Pednekar said her priority was to rid the city of potholes and plastic. “My focus will be to rid the city of potholes and plastic. I will also improve quality of roads. I am happy that the top party leadership has chosen me for this prestigious post. I will give my best to make the city better,” she said.

Amid the changing political equations in the state, Congress and NCP decided not to field any candidate against the Sena. Defending his stand, opposition leader in the BMC Ravi Raja said the decision of not filing nomination for the mayor’s post was made after the state leadership instructed us.

“We did not field any candidate since we don’t have the numbers. Meetings were held by the top leadership and it was decided to not field any candidate. We all know we have only 29 corporators and NCP only eight, so it is a fact that we can’t have a mayor. We will continue our fight for betterment of Mumbai city,” Raja said.
