Malleshwaram traffic police station is now a ‘massage parlour’

traffic police station

Our boys stand for long hours, doing their duty. Standing on their feet for long hours has adverse effects on their health. Massages will help them rejuvenate after a stressful day at work. — BR Ravikanthe Gowda, Joint Commissioner of Police (Traffic)

.

Bangalore

POLL Should authorities implement massage programmes for traffic policemen in the whole city? Yes No Can't say VOTE

.

A dancer-cum-Ayurvedic masseur who has been roped in for the job, said he loved the idea of giving massages to cops

What do our over-worked traffic policemen need after a day in the gruelling sun, managing unmanageable motorists? Maybe to put their feet up, have a refreshing beverage and a quick nap, perhaps? Now, they will be able to do all that right inside the police station.On Monday, images of traffic policemen sprawled on the floor or getting a relaxing foot massage flooded the internet. These were officials from the Malleshwaramwhich was the first one to start the programme, a brainchild of police commissioner Bhaskar Rao and Joint Commissioner of Police (Traffic) BR Ravikanthe Gowda. The two have instructed all traffic inspectors in the city to find masseurs for relieving the stress of traffic cops after long hours of work.Said Gowda: “Our men stand during their duty time for long hours. Standing for long hours in traffic has a number of adverse effects on the health of the policemen so we decided on a few welfare measures for them. Massages will help them rejuvenate after a stressful day at work. If the traffic police officials are stress free, the work quality will automatically improve.”Malleshwaram Traffic Police Inspector RP Anil toldMirror: “This is basic concern towards constables and other traffic police officials who stand for 8-10 hours in traffic managing vehicles. It is a very stressful job. There is a lot of impact on their health physically and mentally and that is why it is important for traffic police officials to de-stress with massages.”Anil roped in a dancer-cum-Ayurvedic masseur Dinesh Babu for the job. Babu said he “loved the idea of giving massages” to traffic police officials who spend long, punishing hours on the job.But here’s the rub. Babu charges the police officials Rs 150 for a foot or back massage and Rs 250 for a full-body one.The traffic police chief said the department was in the process of tying up with government Ayurvedic hospitals to provide massages to the traffic cops at concessional rates. “We want the massages to be conducted regularly for them. We are also providing regular health check-ups for all our officials to ensure their good health.” On Monday, Dinesh Babu gave foot and back massages to around 25 traffic police cops in Malleshwaram traffic police station; he also used hot water packs to soothe their muscles. “One of our colleagues was suffering from severe pain in the shoulder due to some injury. There was relief after the massage,” said Anil.Babu said the most common problem he encountered among the police officials he serviced was ankle pain as they have to stand constantly.Babu said he plans to visit a different traffic police station and give massages to officials. On Tuesday, he plans to visit Peenya traffic police station and then the ones at Banashankari, Yeshwanthpur, Rajajinagar and Jalahalli on every subsequent day.A relaxing massage isn’t the only thing; traffic police officials will also get day-and-night vision glasses to protect them from the glaring sun and the high beams of vehicles. Looks like the good days are finally here for our traffic police officials.
