Mamata Banerjee: In a first, Mamata warns of ‘minority extremism’

Mamata Banerjee slams Centre over Citizenship Amendment Bill

COOCHBEHAR: Trinamool chief Mamata Banerjee , in a first ever, brought changes in her rhetoric against BJP and warned people against “minority extremism.” Without naming the Majlis-e-Ittehadul Muslimeen (MIM) Mamata at a Trinamool workers’ meet in Coochbehar said: “I am watching that there are some extremists among the minorities. They have their base in Hyderabad. Don’t listen to them.”Minutes after workers’ meet the chief minister went to the Madan Mohan Temple in Coochbehar to offer her prayers before she went to the Rash Mela on the Rajbari gorunds. Mamata’s offering the puja at Madan Mohan Temple comes six days after BJP’s Coochbehar MP Nisith Pramanik came in a grand procession to the temple last Tuesday, performed the puja, spinned the Rash Chakra and offered gifts to the temple.Political observers reading Mamata’s comment against “minority extremism” and her offering prayers at Madan Mohan Temple together held that the ruling Trinamool is desperate to win over the Hindu votes, both Bengali and Rajbanshi, who hold the key in Coochbehar. At the moment Trinamool has made dents into the Rajbanshi community but is yet to win over the Bengali refugee votes.“I appeal to the Trinamool leaders to close ranks and take up challenge against BJP. Our activists are the party’s assets. I would ask you not to work for groups under leaders. Work for the flag you hold. There should be an end to Trinamool leaders making comments against each other. The party is not going to swallow the poison they spit. I am happy that Trinamool MLAs, councillors are working together as a team now. The party wouldn’t have lost seats if they did it earlier,” the Trinamool chief said.Mamata then warned the Trinamool gathering against the BJP’s bid to reassure the Hindu refugees that they are all safe under the proposed Citizenship Amendment Bill. “CAB is a hoax. It struck them after 19 lakh Bengalis, non-Bengalis, Gorkhas in Assam could not make it to the final NRC list. Now they are talking of the CAB when people under the CAB will be treated as non-citizens for six years,” the CM said. “You have already got your names enrolled in the voter’s list. Your sons and daughters are going to schools. You are all enjoying the benefits of various state schemes. What else do you need to apply for citizenship afresh?” the CM said.Calling BJP, Congress and CPM Jagai, Madhai and Gadai, Mamata said: “The CPM harmads have now joined BJP to become ostads. The leaders of Congress and CPM are taking anti-BJP stance in Delhi. But when it comes to Bengal they are all cobbling up against Trinamool.”
