Amid Sena-BJP bickering in Maharashtra, RSS chief cautions on ‘selfishness’

Weighing in on the recent divorce between the BJP and the Shiv Sena over government formation in Maharashtra, RSS chief Mohan Bhagwat cautioned both the parties that “selfishness is a bad thing”.

“Everybody knows that both of them will face loss if they are going to fight over a matter. Everyone knows that selfishness is a bad thing but very few people give up their selfishness. Take the example of the country or of individuals,” Bhagwat said.

The comments from the RSS chief came while he was addressing an event in Nagpur on Tuesday morning.

Earlier today, senior Shiv Sena leader Sanjay Raut reiterated that a “strong and stable” government will be formed soon. The remarks came a day after Nationalist Congress Party (NCP) boss Sharad Pawar, after a meeting with Congress president Sonia Gandhi, said that they did not discuss a possible alliance with Sena.

ALSO WATCH | Soon an ideal govt will be formed in Maharashtra under Shiv Sena: Sanjay Raut

Pawar has maintained that he is in talks with his pre-poll partner Congress and other smaller parties over the political situation in the state. The Congress, on its part, has remained evasive on the subject of government formation.

Long-time allies, the Shiv Sena and BJP, who contested the polls together, dithered over government formation in Maharashtra after the former insisted on rotational chief ministership. The BJP, on its part, denied agreeing to any such demand. Soon after the Shiv Sena’s lone MP, Arvind Sawant, resigned from the union cabinet. With no party in a position to stake claim for power, the President’s rule was imposed in the state last week.

Since then the Sena, which bagged 56 seats in the state polls, has been in talks with the NCP and the Congress to stitch up an alliance and has expressed confidence that a Sena chief minister will soon be ruling Maharashtra.

While the BJP emerged as the single-largest party in Maharashtra assembly polls with 105 seats, the NCP and Congress have 54 and 44 MLAs, respectively, in the state Assembly.
