View from the right: Legal Mythology

The Sangh Parivar believes that the latest Supreme Court judgment on the Ayodhya issue has given legal sanctity to Hindu scriptures, nation’s oral history and mythological figures. In the latest issue of Organiser, the English mouthpiece of the RSS, an editorial has argued that the unanimity and clarity of the judgment is iconic in how it spans periods of history from Skanda Purana to modern-day legal provisions.

“The oral and scriptural history of Bharat has got renewed sanctity through this judgment. The concept of the deity being a juridical entity, with specific nature and form, is a unique Bharatiya legal concept. The Pran Pratishtha of the deity, the customs involved and also the nature of ownership of property also has a great deal of bearing on the legal interpretation,” the editorial said. It has argued that Ram Janmabhoomi was never a Hindu-Muslim dispute, rather it was about reclaiming the icon of Indian civilisation. “The invasion of Babar as explained by Guru Nanak Dev, did not spare anybody, irrespective of caste, gender and religion. Since 1528, there have been 76 battles to reclaim the Janmabhoomi — not just for a place of worship but also for a symbol of our national icon, whose birthplace was attacked by the invaders,” the editorial said.

Mediation Disaster

The latest issue of Organiser, largely dedicated to the verdict, has also carried a detailed interview of Champat Rai, vice president of the VHP. Rai has claimed that the mediation carried out by Sri Sri Ravi Shankar was going in a direction that could have led to mass violence.

“In the latest dialogue process, I was also a part. We clearly explained our stand before that panel headed by Sri Sri Ravi Shankar. If the proposals of that panel are accepted, large-scale violence may begin in this country at hundreds of places. I don’t know who gave those suggestions to the panel. It is more serious that the panel members asked us questions about those unmindful suggestions. No sensible person can offer a solution which opens up a Pandora’s box of problems. But, that panel did it. It is a serious matter. That dialogue was bound to fail and that happened,” Rai has said in response to a question on efforts at mediation.

Another article in the same issue has argued that by not accepting the claim of the Hindus following the demolition of Babri Masjid, the Muslims lost a chance to restore harmony in the country after Partition. “The destruction of the disputed structure saw a spate of reactions amongst the Muslims. However, in reality, Muslims could have taken this up as a second chance to restore harmony. They should have wholeheartedly accepted the proposition of building a temple and relocated the mosque elsewhere,” the article, written by Raamish Siddiqui, said.

Great Betrayal

Organiser has also severely criticised the move by Shiv Sena to cut ties with the BJP in order to have a shot at the chief minister’s post in Maharashtra. In an article titled, “The Great Betrayer”, the Sena has been called a “dalal” and its chief, Uddhav Thackeray, “Dhritarashtra”.

“The entire conduct of Shiv Sena ‘Pramukh’ Uddhav Thackeray (because he is the only leader in the party and the rest are ‘jee huzoors’) can best be compared with that of ‘Dhritarashtra’ of Mahabharata who, in his quest to make his son Duryodhana ‘samrat’ of Bharatvarsha, invited total doom of his clan. Uddhav seems to be exactly treading the ‘Dhritrashtra path’, blinded by his unstoppable desire to make his son Aditya chief minister of Maharashtra,” the article written by Virag Pachpore has said.

Claiming that the Sena had betrayed the people’s mandate, and that it would eventually be punished for it, the article said, “The dirty game the Sena leaders are indulging in, shows how they have reduced themselves to small time ‘dalals’ who are willing to part with valued treasure for petty gains. No political party would behave the way Shiv Sena’s Pramukh Uddhav Thackeray and his “eyes, ears and voice”, Sanjay Raut, is behaving.”

Khalistan Corridor?

The Sangh also appeared to caution the government over the designs of Pakistan to stoke Sikh separatism through the Kartarpur corridor. In an article written by Jaibans Singh, Organiser has asked the government to be wary even though Sikhs are not inclined to fall for Pakistan’s designs.

“It is quite apparent that Pakistan would aim at winning the goodwill of the Sikh community. The project will also allow Pakistan access to certain separatist tendencies that some Sikhs, mainly those living abroad, hold. It is being said that stoking fires of Sikh separatism is the prime objective of the Pakistan army in the project. This is in accordance with what is called the Bajwa Doctrine. This Doctrine, named after the present Pakistan army chief, envisages opening a front of separatism in Indian Punjab, now that the going for Pakistan and the Jihadists that it nurtures is getting tough in Jammu and Kashmir,” the article has argued.
