Supreme Court sets deadline, directs Kerala govt to frame new law for administration of Sabarimala Temple

Kerala's Sabarimala Temple | Photo Credit: PTI

Key Highlights Significant Supreme Court order on Sabarimala Temple SC sets deadline for Kerala government to frame a new law for administration of Sabarimala Temple SC to hear the matter next in the 3rd week of January

New Delhi: The Supreme Court on Wednesday directed the Government of Kerala to frame a separate law for the administration of the Sabarimala Temple. The apex court made the observation while hearing a petition that was originally filed by the Pandalam Royal Family to protect their rights, the standing counsel for the Kerala government informed the media.

The Supreme Court has for now adjourned the matter for the third week of January next year, by when the Kerala government has to frame a law.

During the hearing, the Supreme Court bench told the Kerala government counsel that a law should be exclusively made for the Sabarimala Temple, on the lines of Guruvayur Temple and others, for the better administration and welfare of the pilgrims.

The court said that under the new law, a separate body should be formed to administer the Sabarimala Temple where more than 50 lakh pilgrims visit every year. The court observed that a separate body is needed as the Sabarimala Temple cannot alone be managed by the Travancore Devaswom Board (TDB) alone.

The TDB looks after the administration of most temples in South Kerala districts, including the Sabarimala Temple.

The court said it had asked the Kerala government to frame a new law for Sabarimala Temple on August 27, but the government has so far produced only draft amendments in the Travancore-Cochin Hindu Religious Institutions Act.

“This is not enough. There is a need for a new, exclusive law for the administration of Sabarimala Temple,” the judge stated.

The development came after the Supreme Court last week referred the review petitions challenging its September 2018 order of allowing entry of women of all ages into the Sabarimala Temple, to a larger seven-judge Constitution bench. While delivering the 3:2 verdict, the court had clarified that the September 2018 verdict will hold for now.

It may be noted that today’s observations by the Supreme Court are unrelated to the women’s entry matter.
