Wonder how many non-BJP CMs were consulted on NRC: JD(U)’s Prashant Kishor on Amit Shah’s 'national NRC' push

Prashant Kishor | Photo Credit: IANS

Key Highlights There is no provision in the NRC that people belonging to other religions will not be included in the register: Amit Shah NRC is a different process while the Citizenship Amendment Bill is different Himanta Biswa Sarma said he has urged Amit Shah to dismiss the NRC in its current form

New Delhi: Political strategist and Janata Dal (United) leader Prashant Kishor took a jibe at the Narendra Modi-led NDA government over the National Register of Citizens (NRC). Taking to his Twitter handle Kishor said that 15 plus states with more than 55 per cent of India’s population have non-BJP chief Ministers.

“Wonder how many of them are consulted and are on-board for NRC in their respective states,” he said.

Earlier today, Home Minister Amit Shah said in Rajya Sabha that the National Register of Citizens (NRC) process will be carried out across the country, clarifying there would be no discrimination on the basis of religion.

“There is no provision in the NRC that people belonging to other religions will not be included in the register,” he added.

15 plus states with more than 55% of India’s population have non-BJP Chief Ministers. Wonder how many of them are consulted and are on-board for NRC in their respective states!! — Prashant Kishor (@PrashantKishor) November 20, 2019

Replying to a supplementary during Question Hour in the upper house, Shah had said that the Centre accepts that refugees - Hindus, Buddhists, Jains, Christians, Sikhs and Parsis - who left Pakistan, Bangladesh and Afghanistan facing religious atrocities, should get Indian citizenship.

He further said that the NRC is a different process different from the Citizenship Amendment Bill.

After Shah’s pitch for the NRC process, West Bengal Chief Minister and TMC supremo Mamata Banerjee assured people that she will never allow such a citizen register in the state.

Banerjee also said the NRC in Assam was part of Assam Accord which was signed during the tenure of former prime minister Rajiv Gandhi, adding that the exercise can never be implemented across the country.

She further said that there are few people who are trying to create disturbances in West Bengal in the name of implementation of the NRC.

Addressing a public meeting in Sagardighi in Murshidabad district, the TMC chief said that there can be no division on the basis of religion.

Launching a sharp attack on the BJP she added that before talking about implementing the NRC in West Bengal, the BJP needs to answer as to why 14 lakh Hindus and Bengalis were omitted from the final NRC list in Assam.

Meanwhile, Assam Finance Minister Himanta Biswa Sarma said the state government has requested the Centre to reject the recently published NRC.

The senior BJP leader said even the party has urged the Union home minister to dismiss the NRC in its current form.
