JNU protest: Disabled students head to PHQ over batchmate’s assault

Demanding an inquiry into the incident of lathicharge against a visually impaired student during the protest against fee hike Monday and sensitisation of the police force on disability, a delegation of differently-abled Jawaharlal Nehru University students met with DCP (Central) Mandeep Singh Randhawa Wednesday.

Around 40 students, part of the JNU Visually Challenged Students’ Forum, arrived at the police headquarters at ITO around 12:45 pm. The group had left the university shortly with an initial plan to protest at the new police headquarters at Jai Singh Road. However, members of the forum said that they were stopped by police on their way and taken to Vasant Kunj police station.

“Officers there asked us to tell our grievances to them instead of at the police headquarters. We told them that our grievances are not against them, but against some incidents during the protest on Monday, which should be addressed at a city-wide level. They then agreed to set up a meeting with the commissioner,” said Manish Chauhan, an M.Phil student at the Centre for Study of Law and Governance.

The violence against visually impaired student Shashi Bhushan Pandey was the primary concern among the students, but what was also repeated was Pandey’s claim that police asked him “Andhe ho toh protest mein aaye kyun?”

“By saying something like that, police fundamentally questioned and demeaned our right to protest. Can we, as disabled persons, not ask for our rights?” said Mukesh, a PhD student at the Centre of Indian Languages.

Chauhan pointed out that disabled persons had chosen to be a part of the ongoing protest at JNU because of the way in which the fee hike would affect them. “We will actually be the worst affected… It is such a challenge for disabled persons to make their way to higher education. Raising fees will close off JNU as an option to many,” he said.

Several students also said that there should be a conversation on fee concession for Persons with Disabilities (PWD) students. As of now, the Executive Council has stated that there will be a 50% concession for an undefined BPL category.

According to the university annual report for the year 2017-2018, there were 203 students in the PWD category.

While the students were unable to meet the Commissioner, a delegation of five students met DCP Randhawa. They claimed that the DCP agreed on three of their primary demands — issue a circular to sensitise Delhi Police personnel with regard to dealing with students with disabilities; an inquiry into the incident of lathicharge; and arranging a meeting with the Commissioner of Police.

“We also raised the issue of making the manhandling of disabled persons a recognised punishable offence,” said Pankaj Singh Kushwaha, a PhD student at the School of International Studies.

Randhawa said, “We assured the students that we will look into their demands and help solve their problems.”

A police officer said that if “evidence indicates police’s fault, including lathicharge, then appropriate action will be taken.”
