Tread carefully: The NRC mess in Assam should serve as a cautionary tale for a nationwide exercise

The government needs to carefully weigh the pros and cons of extending the National Register of Citizens (NRC) across the country. The NRC mess in Assam should serve as a cautionary tale. The exercise caused tremendous hardship in the state and reportedly forced some people to commit suicide. A nationwide NRC could result in large-scale disruptions to everyday life as well as to the economy – and that the nation can ill-afford at the moment.

Besides, there is a history to NRC in Assam. It was a way of implementing the 1985 Assam Accord which followed a massive influx of illegal immigrants in the state that triggered a mass movement, and fixed March 25, 1971, as the cut-off date after which foreigners would be detected and expelled. Plus, the latest NRC in Assam was a Supreme Court mandated and monitored process. Other states lack such a history. Moreover, even in Assam’s limited context it has hardly proven successful. BJP in Assam is itself up in arms against it, and wants it done all over again. What’s the guarantee that we won’t see a repeat on a much larger scale?

It’s worth keeping in mind that NRC verification isn’t as simple as producing a voter ID card or a passport. In the Assam NRC, one first had to produce documentary proof issued before March 24, 1971 – like the 1951 NRC or electoral rolls up to March 24, 1971 – to prove that one’s ancestors were residing in India before that date. The next step was producing documents for oneself to establish relationship with those ancestors. In a country with a poor documentation culture and crores of people with meagre financial resources, such onerous requirements are often beyond one’s means.

One needs to take a step back and think through what the move entails conceptually. It is akin to asking 125 crore Indians reapply citizenship. This is unprecedented anywhere in the world. Moreover, what happens to the lakhs if not crores of people who might be excluded by the arduous process of NRC proof? We could have a humanitarian crisis. The government needs to tread with great caution on this one.

Facebook Twitter Linkedin Email This piece appeared as an editorial opinion in the print edition of The Times of India.
