Bengaluru: Rebels, anti-incumbency may hit BJP prospects

Bengaluru: The BJP, which held a meeting with its election prabharies of the 15 constituencies heading for bypolls on December 5, has set itself a target of winning all the assembly seats that have fallen vacant since the resignations of the former Congress and JD(S) legislators to bring down the Kumaraswamy government in July.

Although Chief Minister B.S.Yediyurappa claimed the party had a very good chance of making a clean sweep of these assembly seats during the byelections, the reports presented by its leaders in charge of the constituencies warned that the rebel factor, people's anger against the disqualified legislators, who had quit a little over a year after being elected, and the fielding of weak candidates could affect its prospects in a few segments.

According to sources, the warnings were specific to Hosakote, Gokak, Chikkaballapura, Hunsur and Ranebennur assembly constituencies. In Hunsur , disqualified legislator, A H. Vishwanth , who is contesting on a BJP ticket, has a tough fight on his hands, going by the ground reports.

Mr Yediyurappa was also warned that unless the party doused the rebellion in Hoskote, Vijayanagar, Gokak and Kagwad, the BJP could find it difficult to sail through the bypolls.

But former minister , Aravinda Limbavali, who is in charge of the byelections, claimed that the reports from those overseeing the bypolls in the 15 constituencies had said the party had a good chance of winning them all.

"We have obtained reports from those in charge of the byelections and they indicate that party has a bright chance of winning all 15 seats," Mr. Limbavali said, adding, "We have set right the small differences in few constituencies and now there is no confusion. As for Hosakote, the party has instructed rebel candidate, Sharath Bachegowda to withdraw his nomination on or before 3 pm on Thursday, and if he fails to do so, party president, Nalin Kumar Kateel will take appropriate action against him. He may even be expelled from the party," Mr Limbavali warned.

He also revealed that the chief minister and Mr Kateel would begin their campaign in all 15 assembly constituencies from November 22.

Meanwhile, Deputy Chief Minister Dr C.N. Ashwathnarayana has been put in charge of the K.R.Nagara bypoll, where the BJP anticipates a tough fight from the JD(S).
