Tamil Nadu: False smoke alarm forces emergency landing of plane

CHENNAI: A Coimbatore-Chennai IndiGo Airlines flight with around 160 people made an emergency landing on Wednesday morning after a smoke alarm went off in the cargo hold as it was nearing the city. The A320 landed safely at the scheduled 10.40am and the alarm was found to be false.The second incident in the last 20 days involving an IndiGo flight at Chennai has raised concerns of safety. In both incidents, a false smoke alarm forced a emergency to meet which the airport mobilised equipment and personnel.IndiGo flight 6E-892 had “a momentary smoke caution for the aft cargo compartment. Post arrival in Chennai, the smoke caution was noted to be spurious. Aircraft (VT-IKI) is currently in Chennai to rectify the cause of the spurious caution,” said a statement from the airline which didn’t respond to the question on steps being taken to prevent repeat of such incidents.An airport official said “a full emergency was declared soon after the pilot informed about the smoke alarm, and crash tenders were on standby by the side of runway when the plane touched down. They followed the plane till it reached the parking bay.” The airline was attending to the false alarm.There was a mild delay in the landing of the next two IndiGo flights from Hyderabad and Mangalore scheduled for 11.15am and 11.20am.On November 1, an IndiGo Chennai-Kuwait flight had to return after takeoff after a smoke alarm went off in the cargohold. In this case, two smoke detectors were found to be faulty. An engine nag forced four planes to return in October.Air safety expert Captain Mohan Ranganathan said it was a matter of concern if it occurred frequently.“It will affect the confidence of pilots and cabin crew. Pilots will be worried if they are having a safe aircraft. Though the warnings are false, the crew will be under stress because they will be worried whether they may have to face a real emergency. Such incidents also affects passenger confidence. .”
