Congress-NCP pact with Sena for Maharashtra govt likely today

Stable govt in Maharashtra soon: Congress-NCP

NEW DELHI: Indicating definite progress in forming a government in Maharashtra, Congress and NCP on Wednesday jointly announced that they will form a “stable” government.The NCP-Congress deliberations came in the wake of moves to form a coalition government with the Shiv Sena, which walked out of its pre-poll pact with BJP after the election results over the issue of splitting the chief minister’s term and a 50:50 share of ministerial berths.The announcement came after a three-hour meeting at the residence of NCP chief Sharad Pawar focusing on finalising a “common minimum programme” to run the alliance government.Nawab Malik of NCP and former CM Prithviraj Chavan of Congress, who addressed a press conference, did not name the Sena even as they said the three parties will have to join hands to form the government. Chavan said they were hopeful of ending the political uncertainty even as a few issues remained to be discussed.The development could bolster the Sena camp, which has been waiting for letters of support from NCP and Congress. “All matters should be sorted out in a couple of days. We could approach the governor by Saturday if things go as planned,” a senior Sena leader said.Sena sources said concerns in Congress quarters about the need to iron out approaches to issues like NRC and the Citizenship Amendment Bill were not insurmountable as the more contentious Article 370 and Ayodhya were out of the way. They said the alliance under consideration was Maharashtra-centric and did not impinge on the national scenario.The debate in Congress has seen some leaders, notably veteran A K Antony, warn of the fallout of a pact with Sena. A delegation of IUML made the point when it called on Congress president Sonia Gandhi on Wednesday and said the approach to the Ayodhya verdict needed to be nuanced — even though the Kerala outfit initially welcomed it. There is, however, a strong view in Congress that BJP must be stopped from forming a government in Maharashtra.Present in the meeting at Pawar’s house were senior Congress leaders Ahmed Patel, Mallikarjun Kharge, Jairam Ramesh and K C Venugopal, besides Maharashtra’s Chavan and Naseem Khan.They drove to Pawar’s residence straight after a meeting with Sonia, a clear indication that the party chief had given her final nod for the alliance. NCP was represented by Sharad Pawar, Ajit Pawar, Jayant Patil and Chhagan Bhujbal, among others.This was the first formal announcement that a three-way alliance of Congress-NCP and the Shiv Sena would form the government. Till now, claims of the unlikely coalition had come from either NCP or state leaders.The CMP was being finalised till late in the night. Sources said the sticking point was the bid to reconcile the platform for coming together of “secular” and “Hindutva” forces.Given the deadlock, sources said a formulation on the lines that the government would “work under the preamble of the Constitution” was proposed. The compromise would have to be cleared by the Congress chief and Sena leader Uddhav Thackeray.
