Implementing nationwide NRC will strain India’s relations with neighbouring countries: HD Deve Gowda

Former Prime Minister and JD(S) chief HD Deve Gowda

Key Highlights The Centre has not taken consequences into consideration about implementing NRC in the country: Deve Gowda Centre needs to learn from bitter experiences from what has happened in Assam Home Minister Amit Shah on Wednesday had said that NRC will be implemented nationwide

Bengaluru: Former Prime Minister HD Deve Gowda has said that if the National Register of Citizens (NRC) is implemented across the country then it will strain India’s relations with neighbouring countries.

Gowda said that the Narendra Modi-led NDA government has not taken consequences into consideration about implementing NRC in the country.

He also said that the Centre needs to learn from bitter experiences from what has happened in Assam after NRC was implemented there.

The JDS patriarch gave this statement after Home Minister Amit Shah said in Rajya Sabha on Wednesday that NRC will be implemented nationwide asserting that no person from any religion needs to be afraid of it.

Responding to a query of Congress leader Syed Nasir Hussain Shah said that the NRC exercise is monitored by the Supreme Court saying that no religion has been targeted or isolated during the NRC exercise.

The Congress MP had asked whether the NRC provides citizenship to immigrants of six non-Muslim faiths.

Countering Shah’s statement in the upper house West Bengal Chief Minister Mamata Banerjee said that her government will never allow the preparation of any such list in the state. She further said that nobody can take away the citizenship of any person and make him/her a refugee.

"A few people are trying to foment trouble in the state by saying that NRC exercise will be carried out in Bengal. I would like to make it very clear, that we will never allow the NRC exercise in Bengal," IANS quoted Mamata as saying.

Janata Dal (United) leader and political strategist Prashant Kishor also took a dig at the Centre over NRC saying: "15 plus states with more than 55 per cent of India’s population have non-BJP Chief Ministers, wonder how many of them are consulted and are on-board for NRC in their respective states."

Kishor’s statement is in line with the party’s official stance over NRC. Earlier, JD(U) principal general secretary KC Tyagi had said that the party is very clear that there is no need for NRC in Bihar or any other state.

Yesterday, a US government commission labelled NRC a "downward trend in religious freedom" in India over efforts to link Assam to the Kashmir issue.

"The NRC as a tool to target religious minorities and, in particular, to render Indian Muslims stateless has become one more example of the downward trend in religious freedom conditions within India,” read the brief released on Tuesday by the US International Commission on Religious Freedom (USICRF).

It further said that 1.9 million people in Assam were at risk of becoming stateless.
