9000 Indians, other South Asians tried to enter US last year

New Delhi: Around 150 Indians deported from the US for allegedly flouting visa norms, landed in Delhi airport on Wednesday morning. The special aircraft carrying the Indians, many from Punjab, landed at Terminal 3 in the morning. The aircraft came via Bangladesh.

Illegally entering US

The Indians were deported for allegedly flouting visa norms or for illegally entering the US.

The deportation comes after over 300 Indians were deported from Mexico on October 18 for trying to enter the US illegally.

The deportation of the 311 Indians, including one woman, was the first case of flying back such a huge number of illegal migrants from Mexico.

Immigration sources have confirmed that these Indians had illegally reached Mexico over the last few months with the help international agents who had allegedly promised them entry into the US through illegal means.

“Majorly these passengers travelled from India through two private airlines to Mexico and were facilitated by travel agents, who charged Rs 25-30 lakhs per person,” a senior immigration official said, requesting to withhold identity.

“The cost includes stay, air fare, meals etc. Agents took around a week to a month’s time to arrange entry into the US,” the official added.

According to data, over 7,000 Indians are facing deportation proceedings in courts in the US.

As many as 9,000 Indians and other South Asians tried to enter the US last year via the US-Mexico border, seeking asylum.

According to a North American Punjabi Association report of last November, 2,400 Indians were languishing in US jails for illegally crossing the border.

Number of Indian arrested tripled

According to the report published in Reuters, in 2018, the number of Indians arrested for trying to enter the US illegally has nearly tripled.

Spokesperson of U.S. Customs and Border Protection (CBP) said that the number of India who are entering the US illegally by paying smuggling rings between $25k-$50K per person is increasing.

It may be mentioned that the asylum seekers include Indians who are facing death threats for marrying outside their caste, Sikhs etc.
