Karnataka bypolls: Campaigning begins, highlights of Nov 22

Karnataka bypolls: As campaigning for the upcoming bye-elections to 15 legislative constituencies in Karnataka kick-started on Friday, here are the major highlights of the day:

‘Cooker’ symbol has inspired mothers to attend roadshow: Sharath Bacchegowda

BJP rebel and Independent candidate in Hoskote Sharath Bacchegowda was welcomed by hundreds of people in Hoskote on Friday as he began his campaign trail.

A day after he was allotted ‘cooker’ as his symbol for the upcoming bypolls, he said that the same has “inspired mothers” to attend his roadshow, indicating their support for his candidature.

During his campaign, he chose to speak about various developmental activities the voters in the area were deprived of in the last few years.

READ| Karnataka: Congress, JD(S) vow to ensure defeat of rebels in bypolls

“Other than some minor road construction and patchworks carried out in Hoskote, the people here have been deprived of either major developmental activities to improve the town/village infrastructure or policy developments favouring the farmers,” he said during his campaign.

Sharath Bache Gowda, is contesting bypolls from Hoskote as a JD(S)-backed Independent. Interestingly, his father B N Bache Gowda is the incumbent BJP MP of Chikkaballapura which the legislative constituency is also part of.

Don’t ask me anything about Siddarmaiah: M T B Nagaraj

A day after Congress leader Siddaramaiah accused friend-turned-foe M T B Nagaraj of funding ‘Operation Lotus’ alleging BJP’s poaching of MLAs, BJP candidate from Hoskote MTB Nagaraj on Friday distanced himself from making comments on Siddarmaiah.

When asked for his reactions to the former CM’s comments, Nagaraj told reporters in Hoskote, “You can ask me whatever you feel like but I won’t make any further comment related to him (Siddarmaiah).”

It can be recalled that the assets of M T B Nagaraj had gone up by Rs 185 crore over 18 months, according to the affidavit he submitted to the Election Commission while filing his nomination for the bypolls.

Renukacharya says Cong lacks unity, calls Dinesh Gundu Rao a ‘buffoon’

BJP leader M P Renukacharya took a dig at his political rivals Karnataka Pradesh Congress Committee terming their president Dinesh Gundu Rao a “buffoon.” He said that the Congress’ dream to return to power in Karnataka is “far from reality as they lack unity.”

Criticising leader of opposition Siddaramaiah, the BJP MLA from Honnali, said, “Siddaramaiah should stop daydreaming of becoming the (Karnataka) chief minister once again.”

Siddaramaiah, Sadananda Gowda indulge in war of words

As the election campaigning heats up in Karnataka, former chief ministers Sadananda Gowda and Siddaramaiah indulged in a war of words on Friday, as both took on each other.

Senior BJP leaders D V Sadananda Gowda and Shobha Karandlaje campaign for disqualified MLA S T Somasekhar in Yeshwantpur. Express Photo Senior BJP leaders D V Sadananda Gowda and Shobha Karandlaje campaign for disqualified MLA S T Somasekhar in Yeshwantpur. Express Photo

While campaigning for BJP turncoat and disqualified MLA K Gopalaiah in Mahalakshmi Layout, Union Minister Gowda said, “Siddarmaiah has no support from within his party as he is an isolated leader. I think his mental state is deteriorating day after day.”

READ| Karnataka bypolls: Final list of candidates from leading parties

Reacting to the comments, Siddaramaiah wrote on Twitter, “Why are BJP leaders afraid of me if at all I’m all by myself? It seems like Narendra Modi and Amit Shah has promised BJP leaders from the state of some prize for whoever criticises me the most.”

He further added that Gowda has been sidelined by the BJP as he has been demoted from being the Union Minister for Railways to Law and Justice, to Statistics and Programme Implementation, to Chemicals and Fertilizers at present.
