Heavy rain, snow in Kashmir, Shimla, Kullu, Mussoorie, Nainital; high risk of avalanche

Weather News and Analysis

Skymet Weather Team

The wet spell is all set to be back with a bang in the trio hilly states of North India by today evening in the wake of a fresh Western Disturbance over North Pakistan and Jammu and Kashmir with its induced Cyclonic Circulation over Northwest Rajasthan and neighboring areas. This spell initiating from today will continue until February 8.

The upcoming rains commencing from today would start on a lighter note and the intensity would increase thereafter. The rains over the hills are making a comeback after a gap of four days with the last spell being witnessed on January 31. As per the experts, this spell could possibly be heavier than the spell that occurred in the fag end of January.

On February 5, weather activity will remain light with rain and snow picking up pace around February 6 covering the entire hills. . By February 7, rain and snow will become heavy in nature. By February 8, rains would start receding and the weather system will start shifting eastward. The maximums over these regions would drop significantly. Not only this, there are chances of avalanche and landslides over Baramulla, Kupwara, Ganderbal, Bandipora, Lahaul Spiti and Kinnaur. Probability of cloud burst in Uttarakhand cannot be ruled out

We are well versed with the fact that the winter season is precisely for three months, i.e. from December till February, wherein the peak starts from mid-December and goes on till first week of February 10. Chillai Kalan is a harsh winter period of 40 days when the snowfalls are most frequent, and temperatures drop considerably. This ends on January 31, but the cold wave continues in Kashmir post this as well. It is then followed by a 20-day, Chillai-Khurd ( small cold) and a 10-day long, ‘Chillai- Bachha’ ( baby cold).

Everything up in the hills is driven by rain and snow. Winters in hills comprise of icy cool winds, hailstorms, cold wave, snowfall and rainfall. Snowfall is the backbone of the winter season. This is also responsible for Cold Wave conditions over the hills.

Image Credit: Flickr

Please Note: Any information picked from here must be attributed to skymetweather.com
