“I will not allow anyone to drive away a single citizen from our state,”

Chief Minister of West Bengal Mamata Banerjee reiterated her pledge to oppose any effort to roll out the National Register of Citizens in Bengal on a day Union home minister Amit Shah said the exercise would be carried out across the country.

The reassurance came from a rally in Murshidabad is being seen as an attempt to assuage concerns in the state. “There are some people who are creating panic among people by saying the NRC would be implemented in Bengal. Don’t listen to these leaders as they are outsiders. I will not allow anyone to drive away a single citizen from our state. It is not possible in Bengal,” Mamata told a rally at Dhomarpahar near here.

The timing of the reassurance by Mamata from Murshidabad assumes political significance because three Assembly bypolls are lined up in Bengal on November 25. Out of the three seats, Kaliyaganj in North Dinajpur and Karimpur in Nadia are on the border with Bangladesh.

In Kaliyaganj, 74 per cent of voters are Hindus, majority of whom crossed over from Bangladesh.

Apart from the NRC, the Trinamul chief again launched a veiled attack on the AIMIM (All India Majlis-e-Ittehadul Muslimeen) led by Asaduddin Owaisi.“A party from Hyderabad is taking money from the BJP and distributing it in Bengal. They will not fight against the BJP. It is the Trinamul Congress that will fight against the BJP. They will try to provoke you, but don’t listen to them. We are always with you,” said the chief minister.At her administrative meeting in Berhampore, the chief minister asked the district magistrate and the police superintendent to look into how the “party from Hyderabad” was getting permission to hold indoor and outdoor meetings in Murshidabad.“I am asking the SP, DM, IC and OCs, you have to find out how the party from Hyderabad is coming here and conducting indoor and outdoor meetings. You have to find out what they are doing at those meetings,” the chief minister said.
