Celebrating the Dedicated Doctors of AIIMS

“Contrary to what people imagine, this place is not for VIPs but for VOPs,” said Dr Rajeshwari Subramaniam, the presiding (self-designated) “dragon” of the main intensive care unit (ICU) at the All India Institute of Medical Sciences. Later that day, as my mother was wheeled into Emergency before admission to ICU 10 days ago, I realised just how true her words were.

In August, when the late Arun Jaitley (who always swore by the dedicated doctors of AIIMS) was admitted in the Cardio-Neuro ICU in his last days, and a little earlier, Sushma Swaraj, many may have contested Dr Rajeshwari’s words. After all, a galaxy of Important People were seen in attendance, ministers and party bosses were camping there; the media hovered not far off.

But that was just a section of the vast hospitalopolis (if anything, AIIMS is a mini-city); the rest of the campus was undoubtedly the domain of Very Ordinary People (VOPs) — patients and family members who came from the farthest corners of India seeking a healing touch. Even the ambulance driver told me, “Now that your mother has reached here, she will emerge well again.”

That was not to be, as she passed away within 12 hours of admission, but the dedication of the doctors was apparent at every stage. My mother was about as much of a VIP as a media person’s kin can be: not quite aam aadmi, but certainly not in the league of political panjandrums. Corporate VIPs, understandably, prefer the more select environs of private hospitals in India.

In the Emergency department of AIIMS where all patients have to be examined and evaluated before being admitted to ICU, the sheer diversity and profusion of VOPs was manifest. My mother was there to remove a breathing tube (which had to be done under ICU conditions) and as we waited our turn for the examination, the daily drama of the Emergency played out before us.

From a wiry, shifty man with handcuffs on his extraordinarily huge wrists to a middleaged lady in a synthetic yellow saree, clearly in the throes of a heart attack, the incredibly busy doctors on duty certainly had to multi-task. “How many patients do you get in a day?” I asked a young doctor who managed to look in fairly good humour despite the chaos. “Between 300 to 400,” he replied.

My mother, who spent most her life helping the under-privileged and neglectedin India and abroad—would have been pleased that she was amid the VOPs she always championed. And she would have commended the thoughtfulness of the doctors. For even as her stretcher was wheeled in, the senior doctor cautioned his team to remember to keep enough space for other stretchers.

And sure enough, minutes later, a man perhaps in his 60s was rushed in and hooked immediately into a breathing apparatus. As AIIMS is a teaching hospital, the senior doctor—also a part of the faculty—pointed out the markers indicating his ailment even as the junior doctors speedily carried out the mandatory tests that were also done on my mother. Never a moment to even breathe.

Upstairs in the ICU, there was no chaos, but nor was anyone taking it easy. My mother was meant to be there for only 48 hours, for we had no intention of occupying a bed there for longer than necessary given the sheer pressure of critical patients at AIIMS. Even more so after Dr Rajeshwari told us about the cases that her unit handles, most of whom cannot afford private medical care.

Though her heart, lungs and kidneys were robust enough for the doctors to consider taking the tube out that day itself, they decided to give her a 24 hour rest period as she was 87. My feisty mother, never one to toe the line, obey others unquestioningly or accept the dictates of age, remained true to type at AIIMS. Just when the doctors thought she had settled for the night, she called it a day.

“All her parameters were so good. There was no reason for her to have myocardial infarctions,” said the young doctor who had brought her up to ICU from Emergency. “I’m so sorry Ma’am, I just don’t know why this happened.” My answer was simple: “If you and the rest of the ICU team knew ‘why’, you’d be God, not doctors. Each of you did all you could. The rest is not in your hands.”

That said, these doctors—young, and not-so, senior and junior, faculty and super-specialty residents—are the nearest thing to God for so many—too many—VOPs. As one doctor there earnestly told me, “It is shocking that in 70 years, only one AIIMS exists in India; by now there should’ve been one in each state.” More are coming up but mere buildings don’t make institutions, people do.

India is emerging as a medicare hub, with patients coming from around the world to our state-of-the-art private hospitals. But for India’s billion VOPs, AIIMS and a few other likeminded state-run institutions are the only hope. Experiencing first-hand the values of service and compassion of AIIMS doctors, I am left in awe of not only their skills but their dedication. My mother would have concurred.

Facebook Twitter Linkedin Email Disclaimer Views expressed above are the author's own.

END OF ARTICLE
