The story of Swachh Bharat Mission

Prime Minister Narendra Modi gave an unconventional speech from the Red Fort on Independence Day. He asked the country to focus on making India open defecation free (ODF) and realise Mahatma Gandhi’s dream of Swachh Bharat’.

On October 2, Modi declared rural India was ODF. Meanwhile, the government has set a December 31 deadline for urban India to become ODF. The PM’s inaugural Independence Day speech was keenly watched by many, including Parameswaran Iyer, then with World Bank and posted in Hanoi, Vietnam. Now, as secretary, department of water and sanitation in the Jal Shakti ministry, Iyer has edited a formidable anthology of essays that talk about the '4Ps' of Swachh Bharat Mission (SBM) lessons from one of the world’s largest sanitation programmes political leadership, public finance, partnerships and people’s participation.

Calling SBM the "world’s largest behaviour change programme," Iyer adds that the disruption of people’s habits and misconceptions was an uphill task, which required many stakeholders filmstars, international agencies and, more importantly, village motivators. "SBM put into practice the concept of cooperative, competitive federalism by invoking the Prime Minister-chief minister- district magistrate construct, and added its own innovation... the grassroots village motivator." SBM has made ODF a part of the national vocabulary and fostered new words like swachhagrahi’ a play on Gandhiji’s satyagrahi’ who insists on the pursuit of cleanliness.

It includes essays by actors Akshay Kumar, Amitabh Bachchan, industrialist Ratan Tata, India’s ODF pioneer Bindeshwar Pathak of Sulabh, exAustralian PM Kevin Rudd, Jharkhand CM Raghubar Das and water.org founders Gary White and Matt Damon among others. This list shows the multi-faceted approach of SBM to make India open defecation free by constructing toilets, changing people’s habits, creating awareness about the link between sanitation and health. In the process, a section of society has been freed from the stigma of being night soil’ workers and dignity has been restored to conversations about cleanliness, sanitation, health and hygiene.

The book is a ready reckoner for policy enthusiasts about one of PM Modi’s signature campaigns. It also makes a policy topic more accessible. "Ensuring universal access to safe sanitation as we have learned from India’s Swachh Bharat Mission, is possible only with sound political will, solid public finance, strong policies and sustained people engagement" World Bank regional vice president Hartwig Schafer writes.

Water.org’s Gary White and Matt Damon shed light on how microlending has bridged the funding gap for the physical infrastructure of SBM. "With the launch of SBM water and sanitation were officially included within

PSL in 2015 The mission to end open defecation now had the banks on its side," they write. In Chhattisgarh’s Jashpur district, school students wrote letters requesting their families to construct a toilet and women fasted on Harkalika Teej for their husbands and for swachhata’, former district collector Priyanka Shukla writes.

SBM is the story of what happens "if one inspired man makes an earnest appeal to a nation and challenges his people to achieve something which no one thought was achievable," Iyer signs off in his epilogue.

THE SWACHH BHARAT REVOLUTION

EDITED BY PARAMESWARAN IYER,

HARPERCOLLINS; Rs 699
