PM, BJP involved in murder of democracy: Congress

Congress leader KC Venugopal | Photo Credit: IANS

New Delhi: AICC General Secretary KC Venugopal said in a statement on Saturday that it was more than apparent that Prime Minister Narendra Modi and other BJP leaders were directly involved in the "murder of democracy".

Venugopal's remarks came after Maharashtra Governor BS Koshyari on Saturday morning administered the oath of office to Bharatiya Janata Party leader Devendra Fadnavis as the new Chief Minister of Maharashtra and Nationalist Congress Party leader Ajit Pawar as his deputy.

"Developments since morning indicate that the BJP will get a huge setback soon for the political horse-trading they have orchestrated in Maharashtra. The Congress will fight against this brutal murder of democracy violating all democratic and constitutional norms," Venugopal said.

He said that only a few NCP MLAs have fallen in the trap of the BJP. This unholy and corrupt political alliance will fall before long, Venugopal said in the statement, adding that the illegally installed BJP government in Maharashtra will have to step down.

The Congress leader insisted that BJP had shown deplorable political immorality to grab power at any cost and the Congress will fight against this illegal and corrupt political treachery carried out by misusing power and violating all Constitutional provisions.

"Unable to prove majority, Devendra Fadnavis will have to step down shamefully after the floor test in the House," Venugopal said.

Describing the unfolding of events on Saturday, Venugopal said that was shameful that the President and the Governor stooped to the standard of RSS workers to facilitate this dissolute political treachery.

"The Chief Minister was sworn-in disgracefully under the cover of darkness. Fadnavis and Ajit Pawar met the Governor only last night and consequently the President's rule was withdrawn without having a cabinet meeting. The Governor invited Fadnavis without having any clear clue on the numbers they have," the Congress leader said.
