MAHA TWIST: Congress says BJP acted as contract killer of democracy

BJP chief Amit Shah

Devendra Fadnavis

Congress-NCP-Shiv Sena government

Duryodhan and Shakuni

Ahmed Patel

SQUARE ONE: Congress leaders (from left) Mallikarjun Kharge, KC Venugopal, Ahmed Patel, Vijay Wadettiwar, Prithviraj Chavan and Balasaheb Thorat met at Wadettiwar’s residence near Mantralaya on Saturday afternoon

NCP and Shiv Sena

YB Chavan Centre

NCP chief Sharad Pawar

Cong’s dilly-dallying gave BJP time

Cong says governor has once again proved to be’s ‘hitman’.A stunned Congress on Saturday termed the swearing-in ofas chief minister a “black chapter” in India’s history and asserted that the BJP acted as a “contract killer” of democracy by forming an “illegitimate” government in the state. It also exuded confidence that awill be formed.At a press conference in New Delhi, Congress’s chief spokesperson Randeep Surjewala alleged that the governor once again proved to be BJP chief Amit Shah’s “hitman”.“The BJP and Ajit Pawar have acted liketo rip off and cheat a democratic mandate given by the people of Maharashtra. They have actually betrayed the people,” Surjewala said.At a press conference in Mumbai following a meeting with Congress MLAs, senior leaderechoed Surjewala’s comments. He said the “clandestine” manner in which Fadnavis and Ajit Pawar were sworn in will be written in black ink in the state’s history.Patel, accompanied by AICC general secretaries Mallikarjun Kharge and KC Venugopal, former chief minister Ashok Chavan, state Congress chief Balasaheb Thorat and others, dismissed allegations that the Congress delayed formation of a prospective alliance government by withholding its consent for such an arrangement. The senior Congress leaders were in Mumbai to hold talks with the Sena and the NCP to finalise details of government formation. During their meeting with the MLAs, they discussed the latest developments. They told the legislators that the party would remain in the Progressive Alliance.“This is a black day in Maharashtra’s history. I am surprised as to how Ajit Pawar submitted a list of MLAs surreptitiously. This is a breach of constitution and democracy. They have crossed all barriers of shame,” Patel said, adding that the Sena-Congress-NCP combine will defeat the BJP during the floor test.The Congress, Sena and the NCP had planned to hold a joint press conference on Saturday. The Congress, however, chose to hold one on its own after the latest BJP manoeuvres. Patel denied any rift between the alliance parties. “The criticism that delay in discussions caused this is baseless. We reached the very next day after we were called by the Shiv Sena. Some things were important to be discussed with the Sena. Today we were supposed to meet. What has happened is condemnable,” he said.Earlier, Congress leaders held a meeting with topleaders atspoke in favour of the alliance and said he would take action against his nephew. Sena chief Uddhav Thackeray too said he would fight the BJP. The Congress assured its allies that it would support them. In the evening, Congress MLAs were taken to Jaipur, where they will remain until the day of the floor test.-------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------It was alleged that delay in negotiations from the Congress's side gave the BJP time to lure the NCP legislators. Congress was initially reluctant to join the Shiv Sena. The party leadership held a number of discussions with the NCP and then Sena. The meetings were held in Mumbai as well as Delhi over a period of two weeks. The BJP, which had declared that it was unable to form the government, got ample time to reach out to Ajit Pawar. Congress MLAs were also upset with the delay and blamed it on Delhi leadership. Whenever the Delhi leadership has intervened in state matters, the Congress has lost the state, several MLAs said in the meeting. “Take the examples of Goa and Karnataka, where the Congress lost despite electoral success. But in states like Punjab, Chhattisgarh, Madhya Pradesh and Rajasthan, where the local leadership was given a free hand, we formed governments,” one legislator said.
