Where Nothing Is Impossible: Why A BJP-NCP Alliance In Maharashtra Is Not As Unnatural As You May Think

As of today, the biggest mystery facing India is whether Ajit Pawa’s latest moves have the blessings of his uncle and Nationalist Congress Party (NCP) supremo, Sharad Pawar.



Pawar is a politician whose politics is very difficult to understand for seasoned politicians, leave alone mere mortals like us.



Is Sharad Pawar being genuine in saying that this move by his nephew has come as a surprise for him?



Or this move is indeed blessed by him?



The answers to that would be known by the 30th of November. I won’t put it beyond Sharad Pawar to bless Ajit to lead a breakaway faction of the NCP and form the government with the BJP. A family reunion can always happen down the line.



But in case an actual break has happened, Pawar will have a tough time saving his bastion of Western Maharashtra and Marathwada.



Ajit Pawar has a hold over a lot of the party machinery in these regions. A vertical split in the party would be bad news for Sharad Pawar who is not getting any younger at the age of 79.

If we try to go through the ideologies of various parties in Maharashtra, we find that the Bharatiya Janata Party (BJP) and Shiv Sena have followed the ideology of Hindutva, whereas the Congress has followed ‘secularism’, which veers towards minority appeasement.



However, you would find that the NCP does not have any specific ideology. Their ideology only seems to be a practical pursuit of power.



The NCP has been with the Congress for around 18 years (they had briefly broken the alliance between 2014-16). Now, they were in talks with the Sena to form government. In a not too distant future, the whole party may ally with the BJP, as the Ajit Pawar faction has done now.



Ajit Pawar seems to have got 11-12 MLAs on his side as of now. Whether he can get the required 36 MLAs to be able to form a separate splinter group remains to be seen.

The respective social bases of BJP and NCP are complementary in nature. The BJP gets the support of Brahmins and other upper castes, OBCs, and the Scheduled Tribes in good numbers. The BJP also gets a sizeable amount of Maratha vote in most regions of the state.



The NCP on the other hand is an out-and-out Maratha party, supplemented by some OBC groups like the Malis etc. They get the Muslim vote due to their alliance with the Congress.



The social bases of the BJP and NCP are not antagonistic towards each other, unlike the Congress which can never ally with the BJP.



An alliance with the BJP could allow the NCP to expand its base it Mumbai-Thane, Marathwada, North Maharashtra and Vidarbha. These gains would come at the cost of the Congress and the Sena.

But all of that is in the future. Let us look at the likely scenarios staring at us in next 5-6 days.
