Hardeep Puri’s statement made choice very easy for Delhi people, says AAP’s Sanjay Singh

New Delhi: The AAP Sunday said the BJP had made the choice very easy for the people of Delhi after Union minister Hardeep Singh Puri’s statement that the party would fight the assembly polls under Delhi unit chief Manoj Tiwari’s leadership.

Senior AAP leader Sanjay Singh said it has become clear after the announcement that Delhi Chief Minister Arvind Kejriwal will win more seats this time than what he won in 2015. In 2015, the AAP won 67 seats, while BJP won three seats in the 70-member assembly.

“It is a very clear choice, who do people want. Do they want Tiwari who opposed all pro-people policies of the Delhi government or they want someone like Kejriwal who is completely devoted to them,” Singh told reporters.

AAP spokesperson Raghav Chadha said now the contest was going to be “Arvind Kejriwal vs Manoj Tiwari”.

“We welcome this move by BJP to declare it’s CM candidate for upcoming Delhi elections. Now the match is set, it’s going to be Arvind Kejriwal vs Manoj Tiwari. Remember the same Manoj Tiwari opposed odd-even, condemned free bus rides for women and wants increased electricity tariffs,” he tweeted.

Assembly elections are due in Delhi early next year. Puri said at an event Sunday said the Bharatiya Janata Party (BJP) will fight the upcoming Delhi Assembly polls under the leadership of Tiwari and he will become the chief minister if the saffron party wins.

However, the union minister later tweeted that the party has so far not nominated anyone for the post of chief minister. “The BJP is headed for victory in Delhi. The party has so far not nominated anyone for the post of chief minister. Manoj Tiwari is the president of the party is working vigorously under his leadership. My statement meant that the BJP would win the upcoming elections under his leadership with a huge vote,” Puri tweeted.

Hitting at Puri over his tweet, Singh asked if the BJP was giving a walkover to the AAP in the Delhi assembly. “People in Delhi want to know who is your CM face in Delhi. You mentioned Tiwaji ji’s name and then ran away from the field within two hours. Does the BJP plan to give a walkover to AAP,” Singh asked.

Chadha asked why the BJP took back Tiwari’s name and asked whether the party had any faith in Tiwari. “Why did the BJP take Manoj Tiwari’s name back within two hours? Does the BJP have no faith in Tiwari’s talent? Does this indicate the anti-purvanchali mentality of BJP?” Chadha tweeted.

PTI
