‘Public cooperation in disaster management most important’

Nashik: Fighting natural or man-made disasters is not the job of the administration alone. Citizens should share responsibilities, said Bhagwat Doifode, the resident deputy collector and chief officer of the Disaster Management Authority, Nashik. One of the examples Doifode cited was the recent rescue of a child who had fallen down a borewell in Kalwan taluka.Following are excerpts from an interview:How prepared is Nashik to handle disasters?The Nashik district has good teams in place to fight natural or man-made disasters. The district disaster management authority, under the leadership of the district collector, has readied plans for disaster management across the district. The system also includes various government agencies and has taken into consideration their powers, responsibilities, capabilities and expertise. During an event, these agencies can move in quickly to minimise damage.A recent example?A seven-year-old child of a worker from Madhya Pradesh fell into an open borewell in Navibez village, Kalwan taluka. The National Disaster Response Force from Pune was able to mobilise quickly and, with help from local police, medical teams and citizens, was able to rescue the child.What are the challenges faced by the disaster management authority in Nashik?Given its geographical diversity, Nashik district is vulnerable to many types of disasters. The region experiences some of the highest levels of rainfall in the state; is also affected by drought; dangerous lightning; has dams; and water bodies that can trigger flooding. In terms of man-made disasters, we are keeping an eye on the many industries; major highways ( including the Mumbai-Agra national highway and the Nashik-Pune highway); and the rail routes.How has the administration prepared people to deal with disasters?The administration has drawn out response plans right down to the village level. Villages may be limited by resource availability, but civic groups such as the panchayats, local municipal corporations and other government agencies share the responsibility. The administration has trained and empowered these local groups to respond first before professional help arrives. This is a volunteer force.What support do you need from the people?We often see crowds gathering along bridges and banks near swollen rivers. That behaviour itself can cause disaster. If a bridge the people are standing on is swept away in a flood, imagine the loss of life. Similarly, it's dangerous to gather along the banks of a river that's overflowing. Heavy rain, coupled with loss of tree cover, often causes soil to shift. People standing atop this loose soil are at risk. In remote parts, it will take time for help to arrive. So I request citizens to shake off the urge to gather near flooded areas to take photos or selfies. Keep a safe distance. I also request trekkers to keep local authorities informed so that they can be contacted and mobilised in case of emergencies.What about wild animals straying into cities or towns?Citizens need to exercise caution while dealing with wild animals. The best move will be to stay indoors. Wild animals only react to what they perceive is a threat. Imagine a human being cornered by a bunch of wild animals. So leave them be and proceed to call the police or the forest department. Ensure you are indoors.
