ISIS-inspired module busted in Assam; Delhi cops arrest 3 ‘highly-radicalised’ suspects with IED, baton sword

Delhi Police Special Cell's Deputy Commissioner of Police Pramod Kushwaha | Photo Credit: ANI

Key Highlights The suspects were inspired by terror group Islamic State and “highly-radicalised” The men were apprehended in Assam’s Goalpara district on Sunday They were classmates and had also radicalised some people in Delhi, said the DCP said

New Delhi: The Delhi Police on Monday said that they have averted a terror strike in Assam with the help of local cops.

According to Delhi Police Special Cell's Deputy Commissioner of Police Pramod Kumar Singh Kushwaha, the suspects were inspired by terror group Islamic State and “highly-radicalised”.

The men - identified as Mukadir Islam, Ranjeet Ali and Jameel Luit (all in their early 20s) - were apprehended in Assam’s Goalpara district on Sunday with an Improvised Explosive Device, baton sword, and one kilogram of explosive material.

They were classmates and had also radicalised some people in Delhi, said the DCP said.

Kushwaha, while addressing a press conference, said the arrested people were reportedly planning a terror attack on Raas Mahotsav, which is associated with the Raas Leela of Lord Krishna.

"We were getting intelligence about the three terrorists for quite some time. Assistant Commissioners of Police Special Cell Lalit Mohan Negi and Hriday Bhushan found out during an investigation that these terrorists are from Assam. The men were planning strikes in Assam and then in Delhi. We contacted the Assam Police and nabbed them," Kushwaha said.

Giving more information, Kushwaha said while Jameel Luit, a 12th class pass out, worked at an Aadhar enrolment centre, Mukadir Islam was employed as a driver and Ranjeet Ali worked at a company which sells fish.

The Delhi Police further said that the attack in Assam was supposed to be a trial run as they planned to replicate the similar attack in the national capital. Without specifying the particular place, Kushwaha said the Delhi areas that experience heavy footfall were on the men’s target.

"They were inspired by ISIS module and were planning to carry out IED blast in 'Raas Mela' in Assam as a test run. Raas Mela is a local festival with high footfall. Subsequently, they were planning to execute similar attacks in the high footfall areas of the national capital," DCP Kushwaha said.

He added that a detailed interrogation will reveal further links.

A release issued by Delhi Police reads: "A group of radical youths was identified by the Delhi Police and was subjected to intelligence exploitation. The group consisted of 3-4 persons inspired by ISIS and self-radicalised was conspiring to execute a terror attack in order to destabilise peace and tranquillity. These entities appeared to be inspired by Bangladesh module of ISIS and were also intending to carry out lone-wolf attacks besides bomb blasts."

"During initial interrogation of the accused persons, they informed that the recovered IED is complete in all respect and they had planned to connect the battery just before planting the IED at Raas Mela-Dudhnoi, Assam," it further reads.
