Priyanka Gandhi reaches out to masses, meets slum dwellers in Delhi on a chilly winter night – See pics

Priyanka Gandhi will slum dwellers in New Delhi. | Photo Credit: Times Now

New Delhi: The demand for a star campaigner for the Congress party has propelled Priyanka Gandhi Vadra to the elections forefront and placed her right into the election battlefield. The party’s newest inclusion has enough political mileage to boost her impact on the national front. For someone who belongs to a family tree that boasts of prime ministers in India, Priyanka’s entry into active politics was only a formality.

On Tuesday, the newly-appointed Congress general secretary of Uttar Pradesh East was given an office at the All India Congress Committee headquarters in the national capital adjacent to her brother Rahul two weeks after she formally entered active politics.

The Gandhi scion has begun her march towards the corridors of power in the national capital. For someone who resembles former prime minister and her grandmother Indira Gandhi, Priyanka wants to ensure that the nation sees her as a ‘people’s leader’.

On Tuesday night, she visited a slum at Aurangzeb Road in New Delhi to inspect the living conditions of people in the national capital. There, she also visited a differently-abled boy named Ashish, someone who she has apparently been aiding for years now.

“She comes every two months, spends time with us and enquires about our well-being. She has been helping us in Ashish’s treatment for last 3-4 years,” Ashish’s father Subhash Yadav said.

Delhi:Priyanka Gandhi Vadra visited a differently-abled boy Ashish at Aurangzeb Road cluster housing,today.Ashish's father Subhash Yadav says,"She comes every 2 months,spends time with us&asks us about our well-being.She has been helping us in Ashish's treatment for last 3-4 yrs" pic.twitter.com/JXUsO2wqAN — ANI (@ANI) February 5, 2019

Priyanka was also gracious enough to pose with few dwellers there, a clear message out to her critics that her focus is on the people who matter.

With Priyanka given the charge of eastern UP, Congress has sent a strong signal that despite being snubbed by Samajwadi Party chief Akhilesh Yadav and Bahujan Samaj Party supremo Mayawati, the Grand Old Party is leaving no stone unturned to better its fortune in the upcoming Lok Sabha elections.
