Government set to seek deportation of Ravi Pujari

EVEN AS Mumbai Police and Karnataka Police are in the process of preparing extradition requests for gangster Ravi Pujari who was detained in Senegal on January 22, the government is set to seek his deportation. While the extradition process could take a few months after the Indian government and Pujari are both given a hearing, if Senegal agrees to deport Pujari, he could be in the country within a matter of days.

A source in the security establishment said, “Efforts are being made at the diplomatic level with Senegal to get him deported. It will hasten the process of getting him back to the country.”

Deportation is the process of expelling a foreign national from a country where he is present illegally. The person is sent back to whatever country he came from or his native country. Pujari has an Indian passport but was using a fake passport in the name of Antony Fernandez in Senegal.

Extradition, on the other hand, is the process whereby a person in one country faces a criminal case in another country. In such a case, the country that wants his custody has to apply for extradition, after which both sides are given a hearing.

“The process of extradition can be a long drawn one that allows the person to appeal the extradition order. The extradition process of Dawood Ibrahim henchman Munna Jhingada from Thailand has been going on for a few years. Hence, we want to speed up the process of getting Pujari to India through deportation, as was the case with gangster Chhota Rajan, who was deported to India from Indonesia,” a senior officer said.

Meanwhile, sources said that the Mumbai Police was informed about the operation to detain Pujari around January 19 and was kept in the loop once the operation was successful. It provided French translations of documents about cases against Pujari to authorities in Senegal. It has also begun the process of preparing an extradition request.

A source said, “We have shortlisted around 10 to 15 of the 50 cases against Pujari where there is strong evidence against him, including his voice recordings in threat calls. We will also provide fingerprints of Pujari that we have on our record.” The police are hopeful of sending the request within 30 to 45 days.

The Karnataka Police is also preparing an extradition request. A senior officer said, “Both Mumbai and Karnataka requests will be sent to the central government. It will be their decision about whose request will be submitted before Senegal authorities through the Ministry of External Affairs. Depending upon whose request is put forth by the government, Mumbai or Karnataka Police will accordingly get the custody of Pujari first.”

The last extortion call that Pujari made to Mumbai was on January 13, when he threatened a builder. Of the 50 cases registered against Pujari, 28 of them pertain to the stringent MCOCA. Crime branch officials said that in the last five years, 45 members of the Pujari gang, including his shooters, tippers and money laundering agents, have been arrested.

Sources in the Mumbai Police said that Pujari first came on its radar last year. Pujari had invested money earned through his extortion business in the US using the front of a few Europeans. “The Europeans refused to return the money, following which, he filed a case in US. He was in regular touch with his lawyer. Ever since he has been on our radar,” an officer said.
