India-Pakistan war: Devastating impact of 'suicidal' nuclear war – revealed

India-Pakistan tensions 'likely to explode' says expert

top stories direct to your inbox SUBSCRIBE Invalid email Sign up to receive our rundown of the day'sdirect to your inbox We use your sign-up to provide content in ways you've consented to and to improve our understanding of you. This may include adverts from us and 3rd parties based on our understanding. You can unsubscribe at any time. More info

India and Pakistan have been embroiled in a row over the disputed region of Kashmir, where earlier this year the feud almost spiralled into all-out conflict. Muslim-majority Kashmir has long been an area of conflict between nuclear-armed India and Pakistan. But, back in the 1980’s scientists analysed computer simulations of India and Pakistan entering into a nuclear war with each other, the 'India-Pakistan Model', which produced devastating results, it has been revealed.

In ‘What Does Rain Smell Like?’ by Simon King and Clare Nasir, the meteorologists explained how scientists looked at the impact on the atmosphere if an all-out nuclear war did break out between the countries. The book explains how in the 1980’s both countries had around "50 Hiroshima-type atomic bombs", and the model looked “at how much smoke would be produced from fires” if they were all used. It reads: “Scientists predicted that five million tonnes of smoke would be injected into the atmosphere, which would gradually affect the whole planet.

India-Pakistan war: Scientists warned of the damaging impacts of a nuclear war

Pakistan prime minister Imran Khan

“There would be regional differences in how temperatures would react, but landlocked countries would see temperatures below freezing. “It would be darker, and due to the ozone being destroyed, the amount of UV light reaching Earth’s surface would be much higher. “Planet life, wildlife and natural ecosystems would all be affected.” The pair concluded “a lot of people” were starting to take notice of the catastrophic “consequences of starting a nuclear war” and quickly realising how triggering a nuclear war would be “suicide for the country starting it” as well as “annihilation for the target”. READ MORE: Kashmir fury puts Modi on brink as India leader suffers election blow

India and Pakistan have been embroiled in long-standing feud

The book also discusses tensions during the Cold War, where the US and Russia accepted the catastrophic impacts of a nuclear war on the planet. Hostility between India and Pakistan has long been an area of conflict between nuclear-armed India and Pakistan. Since 1989 around 70,000 are estimated to have been killed in the conflict. Tensions on the border increased earlier this year after India’s decision to remove the special status afforded for the part of Kashmir it controls. DON'T MISS:

India news: Kashmir power move sparks Pakistan fury amid China deal [INSIGHT]

Christianity crackdown: Mobs shut down church service [ANALYSIS]

Imran Khan slammed by protestors as India split Kashmir [REVEALED]

India-Pakistan war: Scientists warned about a nuclear war between the countries

India-Pakistan war: Donald Trump offered to mediate between the countries

And relations took another huge blow before then after a terror attack by militants in the disputed Kashmir region left more than 40 Indian paramilitary police dead. In response, India’s Prime Minister Narendra Modi ordered an airstrike on a camp run by militant organisation Jaish-e-Mohammed which New Dehli claimed killed 300 people, although Islamabad denied this. Days later Pakistan shot down two Indian jets, and displayed captured pilot Wing Commander Abhinandan Varthaman on television before handing him back to the Indian authorities.

What Does Rain Smell Like? Book cover

Planet life, wildlife and natural ecosystems would all be affected 'What Does Rain Smell Like?' by Simon King and Clare Nasir

Kashmir is split between sections under Indian and Pakistani control, and remains one of the most militarised zones in the world. The two nuclear-armed neighbours have fought two wars over the territory since gaining their independence from the UK in 1947. US President Donald Trump offered to mediate between the countries to help settle the crisis.

Simon King: Engineering could be used to reverse climate change

Trending
