Secularism under threat: Narayanan

Narayanan said India’s rich cultural and heritage was under threat to create a sharp division among the countrymen

The comment echoed the narrative that leaders of several non-BJP parties have been trying to highlight after the Narendra Modi government came to power for the second term in a row.

Former governor M. K. Narayanan on Tuesday said secularism enshrined in the Constitution as well as the rich heritage and culture of the country were under threat these days.

“Some principles of the Constitutions are coming under threat… This is not peculiar. Essential democratic behaviour and principles are getting disturbed. The most threatened in this respect in present day situation is secularism,” said Narayanan, a former national security adviser.

The former governor was speaking in the Bengal Assembly on the inaugural day of a two-day programme to observe the 70th year of adoption of the Indian Constitution.

The former governor laid stress on protecting the interests of minorities to save India’s concept of “plural and inclusive” ideals. He also pointed out that there should be a consensus to protect the interest of minorities.

“The pluralism is also under threat. There is need for a consensus to protect the interest of the minorities… The minorities not only need to be protected, it should be ensured that they are not discriminated against,” said Narayanan during his 20-minute address.

Narayanan, who was appointed as the governor of Bengal in 2010 and resigned in 2014 after Modi came to power at the Centre, also mentioned that people in the country should not be left to choose between development and democracy.

“The choice should not be between development and democracy. Progress does not mean suppressing democratic rights and liberal values,” said the former governor.

Narayanan said India’s rich cultural and heritage was also under threat as an effort to create a sharp division among the countrymen was visible, which, according to him, could lead to “destruction”.

“Lord Macauley had said in the British Parliament 200 years ago that India could not be conquered until its rich culture and heritage is destroyed and a sharp division is created among the Indians. About 200 years down the line, the threat is imminent from within,” said Narayanan.

He also mentioned that the relationship between the states and the Centre should not be “under stress” as the Constitution had clearly defined the roles of the states as well as the Centre. “States are not subordinate to the Centre as both draw their strength from the Constitution,” said Narayanan.

He reminded legislators that democracy was a process and everybody should be careful about maintaining it.

“Many sacrifices had been made in the past to maintain democracy in the country. So it should be protected by all means,” he added.
