Delhi's air quality may reach unprecedented low on December 4, suggests new projection model

Smog enveloping parts of Delhi earlier this month | Photo Credit: BCCL

Key Highlights A number of unfavourable factors will contribute to the condition, says the model Levels of pollutant particles could reach 5-7 times the safe standards on December 4 The model is developed by MoES, IITM and IMD

New Delhi: On Thursday, Delhi-NCR witnessed considerable improvement in air quality with favourable weather conditions resulting in a decline in AQI. However, an 'Air quality early warning system for Delhi' suggests that this spell of improved air quality is not here to last.

Still in its initial experimental phase, the system has been developed by the Ministry of Earth Sciences (MoES), Indian Institute of Tropical Meteorology (IITM), Pune and the Indian Meteorological Department (IMD). Earlier versions of the system predicted air quality 72 hours in advance but the most recent model claims that it would make accurate predictions for the next 10 days.

If the new system is to be believed, pollution levels in Delhi will skyrocket on December 4. Levels of pollutant particles PM2.5 and PM10 will touch 5-7 times the safe standards on that day, suggests the model. A drop in temperature coupled with low wind speeds and low boundary layer height could likely trigger a spike in air pollution levels. Such will be the extent of the rise in AQI that the hourly average concentration of PM10 could reach 702 micrograms per cubic metre.

At present, the three-day forecasts are being sent to the Central Pollution Control Board (CPCB) while the credibility of the 10-day model will be tested over the course of the next few months.

The model, in order to predict air quality in advance, takes into account data from satellites on dust aerosouls and particulate matter from stubble burning. Other pollutants such as SO2 and NO2 are also analysed to reach a scientific conclusion. In addition, pollutants, aerosouls and long-range transport of dust are some of the factors that will allow experts to make accurate predictions. Shedding light on the purpose of the new model, a senior official with IMD said that the 10-day predictions will alert concerned authorities about expected spikes in air pollution levels. This will allow various agencies to prepare in advance and could also save lives.

Earlier this month, the Supreme Court of India came down heavily on the centre and Delhi government over their failure to bring down pollution levels in the national capital region. "The people of Delhi are living in a gas chamber. It is better to get explosives and kill everyone," remarked a bench of Justices Arun Mishra and Deepak Gupta. Measures such as a stop on stubble burning activities in the neighbouring states of Punjab, Haryana and the implementation of the odd-even scheme in Delhi have been taken to control air pollution.
