Hindutva gone, good governance CM Uddhav Thackeray’s only game left

Nine years ago, photographer Uddhav Thackeray brought out a book on Maharashtra. Titled Maharashtra Desha’, the book had aerial photographs taken from a chopper.

An excited Uddhav showed his labour of love to then Bombay Times editor Mark Manuel. Manuel had this to say about the book: Over cold coffee, Vada Pav, Bhajiya and Jalebi at the Mayor’s Bungalow, Uddhav unburdened the excitement of producing this glossy coffee table book onto me. First, he got informative about the panoramic lenses, wide angles, aperture sizes and shutter speeds of his cameras. He used to have seven or eight cameras dangling from his neck as he hung on for dear life in the chopper a veteran IAF pilot commandeered at dizzying heights and in crazy weather. Permission from Delhi was necessary. And observers from the armed forces accompanied them to make sure they didn’t violate any no-flying zones.

The chopper door was open. It was flying at all angles so that Uddhav could get unusual frames. The wind forces were treacherous. Uddhav was fastened only by a seat belt.

The chopper flew over the Sahyadri range to Raigad, Jaigad and Poornagad forts, and Sindhudurg, Underi, Khanderi, Korlai, Padmadurg and Murud-Jangira in the sea ensuring coastal protection to the empire of the great Shivaji.

Uddhav told Manuel: I tried to capture a Maharashtra that had an interesting yesterday, a developing today, and a bright tomorrow.

There was one photograph of Vidhan Bhavan, the seat of the legislature in Maharashtra.

Today, at 6.40 pm, Uddhav Thackeray will be Maharashtra’s new chief minister. Maharashtra Desha’s immediate future will be in his hands. As also in the hands of the NCP and the Congress, two rather unlikely bedfellows.

Can chief minister Uddhav ensure a tomorrow as glossy as his coffee table book?

First things first. Son Uddhav will need to break away from father Bal’s Hindu First positioning. It would be difficult, almost impossible, for the new chief minister to push hardline Hindutva being part of the Maha Vikas Aghadi. That is also what the state BJP, left licking its wound after a rather public divorce with the Shiv Sena, will to go town with and try its best to snatch away from the Sena.

Since its inception, Shiv Sena has always managed to conjure up an enemy. It was the South Indians first. Bal Thackeray through his cartoon weekly Marmik, founded in 1960, became the voice of the Marathi manoos. In 1966, Thackeray founded the Shiv Sena to attack the yandugundus (South Indians) with the war cry: Uthao lungi, bajao pungi. Gujratis were next.

The Outsider became the enemy as the Sena insisted Maharashtra is for Maharashtrians. To expand its appeal, Bal Thackeray knew he would need to widen his hate base. So the Muslim became the next target and the rest is history. In an interview to Rajat Sharma, Thackeray admitted Shiv Sainiks were there when the Babri Masjid was brought down.

In the current avatar, after alignment with secular parties, the NCP and the Congress, the Sena will not be able to walk this path.

In 2015, party spokesperson Sanjay Raut said there was no space for secularism in Bal Thackeray's mind so the party believes that the words secular and socialist should be dropped. The same Raut has now said: The country and the Constitution runs on the word secular.

So what gives?

That much-used/much-maligned word development is Uddhav’s only game left. If this unlikely coalition that has Amit Shah-ed Amit Shah needs to remain intact, Uddhav needs to be in that chopper again and this time take a long hard look at what needs to be done on the ground.

The former journalist and a keen Maharashtra watcher Smita Deshmukh says Sena will also try to expand its voter base. Yes, they will lose the traditional Hindu voters but with the Congress, they would want to expand their vote bank beyond Maharashtra. Uddhav’s challenges will be governance and growth. He has never held an administrative or executive post as the family never contested elections. The buzz in Mantralaya is Sharad Pawar will do a massive reshuffle of IAS/IPS officers to make Uddhav's life smooth. The first immediate test would be a decision on farmer loans and jobs, a big part of Congress, Shiv Sena and NCP manifesto. With everyone dubbing this as a khichdi government, the task to ensure the smooth operation will be the key, Deshmukh says.

And what would be Uddhav's take on the Mumbai Metro project? Will his government interfere with the Mumbai-Ahmedabad bullet train project? Will he halt the Samruddhi Expressway project linking Mumbai to Nagpur?

Uddhav's plate is full. His task is two-fold: Manage this complex alliance and meet people's expectations. Sena wanted the CM's post at any cost. Now there is no going back on development, Deshmukh says.

That’s the only way forward.

Farmers, especially from the western Maharashtra belt, live in hope.

FOLLOW LIVE UPDATES ON MAHARASHTRA GOVERNMENT FORMATION
