West Bengal govt gets 'big slap' from Supreme Court: Sambit Patra over CBI vs Police case

Launching a scathing attack over the tussle between the CBI and West Bengal Police, BJP spokesperson Sambit Patra on Tuesday said that the Supreme Court's verdict is a "big slap" on the face of West Bengal government. Speaking to ANI over TMC supremo Dharna here, Patra said

West Bengal Chief Minister Mamata Banerjee on Tuesday ended her 'Save the Constitution dharna,' which she had started on Sunday night after the CBI's attempt to arrest Kolkata Police Commissioner Rajeev Kumar.

Addressing a gathering in Kolkata, Chief Minister Banerjee said: "This Save the Constitution dharna is a victory for the Constitution and democracy. So let us end it today. When we started this dharna only after consulting all political parties and after that, they extended their full support."

She said that she would take her fight against the Central government to Delhi next week.

"Next we will do a programme in Delhi. I can go on with the 'dharna' but now that we have got justice from one pillar of democracy, that is, judiciary I announce to end the 'dharna.' The Supreme Court gave a positive judgment today," she said.

"This 'dharna' was to save our democracy, Constitution, IAS-IPS officers, agencies, civil servants. This 'dharna' is a victory for the people, democracy and the Constitution," added Banerjee.

The Chief Minister also said that the Central government's claim that Kolkata Police Commissioner Rajeev Kumar had joined her in the protest was not true.

"The truth is Rajeev Kumar never joined the protest. Is Rajeev Kumar their nightmare? Why are they so scared of? As per the protocol wherever PM, CM or any other minister or Governor goes, the police always has to be with them to give them security," she said.

A full-blown face-off between Chief Minister Banerjee led TMC government and the Centre erupted after a CBI team moved to arrest Kolkata Police Commissioner Rajeev Kumar. CBI officials were denied entry to the top cop's residence and were detained briefly too.

Escalating her confrontation with the Centre, Chief Minister Banerjee started a sit-in on Sunday night to protest against what the TMC called a 'coup' by Prime Minister Modi led NDA government at the Centre.

The Supreme Court on Tuesday, however, directed Kumar to appear before the CBI in connection with the Saradha chit fund scam probe.

But the bench headed by Chief Justice Ranjan Gogoi said that no coercive step should be taken against Kumar, who will appear before the CBI in Shillong in Meghalaya.

The Supreme Court, which posted further hearing in the case to February 20, also issued a contempt notice to West Bengal Chief Secretary, the DGP and the Kolkata Police Commissioner on a plea which said that a CBI team was detained when it went to question Kumar on Sunday.

(This story has not been edited by Business Standard staff and is auto-generated from a syndicated feed.)
