google: Google warned 500 Indians of govt-backed phishing attacks, Digvijaya raises concern in Rajya Sabha, Telecom News, ET Telecom

7. Was Pegasus used to plant evidence in the phones of accused in Bhima Koregaon case and Praful Patel? Was such ev… https://t.co/obqv6CGZze — digvijaya singh (@digvijaya_28) 1574934249000

NEW DELHI: Google had warned at least 500 Indians about “government-backed attacks” against them between July and September, according to a blog released by the technology giant. No names were given.The blog by Google’s Threat Analysis Group (TAG), says the California-based company had sent out over 12,000 warning to users globally. This is consistent with the number of warnings sent in the same period of 2018 and 2017, the company added.Congress leader Digvijaya Singh raised the concerns in the Rajya Sabha on Thursday and also tweeted out a series of questions for the government to answer. “Google has announced today that 500 Indians were targeted by ‘Govt. backed Attackers’. What is govt’s clarification?” he wrote.TAG is an internal team that works to counter “targeted and government-backed hacking against Google and our users.” It tracks more than 270 targeted or government-backed groups from more than 50 countries. According to Google, these government-backed groups have many goals including “intelligence collection, stealing intellectual property, targeting dissidents and activists, destructive cyber attacks, or spreading coordinated disinformation.”."We've had a long-standing policy to send users warnings if we detect that they are the subject of state-sponsored phishing attempts, and have posted periodically about these before," Shane Huntley from TAG wrote in the blog post on Wednesday.The warning comes close at the heels of the Pegasus spyware attack, which had targeted at least 121 Indians through WhatsApp . Pegasus, a spyware developed by Israeli company NSO Group , was allegedly used against rights activists, lawyers and journalists in India.Google also defined high-risk users for the phishing attempt, saying it includes journalists, human rights activists, and political campaigns.“We encourage high-risk users to enroll in our Advanced Protection Program (APP), which utilises hardware security keys and provides the strongest protections available against phishing and account hijackings. APP is designed specifically for the highest-risk accounts,” Huntley said.The post added that over 90% of these users were targeted via “credential phishing emails” where attempts are made to obtain the target’s password or other account credentials to hijack their account.
