Things to do today in Bengaluru

Nava explores the stories of nine urban transwomen through the nine rasas. With their performance, they unbox, expand, challenge and defy fixed notions of whatconstitutes the Navarasa and who can be its Nayakis. At this Kannada play, they will depict how their community has been deliberately silenced and wilfully ignored,and fight to reclaim their space on the stage.WHERE: Ranga Shankara, 8th Cross Road, RK Colony, 2nd Phase, JP NagarWHEN: 3.30pm 7.30pm, November 30ENTRY: `200, bookmyshow.comCommunity Farm is setting up a farmer’s market today, so go and stock your refrigerator up with fresh and organic produce. Choose from a selection of fruits, vegetables, cheese, millets and spices, brought together by farmers, boutique food manufacturers, home chefs and gourmet startups.WHERE: VR, Whitefield Main Road, Devasandra Industrial Estate, MahadevapuraWHEN: 11am-8pm, November 30CALL: 9620986111Designer Rema Kumar is back with the latest edition of Textile Tales. The collection includes sarees, dupattas and kurtas, crafted with the aim to bind the work of India’s diverse and celebrated surface detail techniques on different weaves such as Batik, Ajrakh, Kalamkari, handblock, Pipli applique, embroidery, Dori, Ari, Zardosi, Patti ka kaam, and Kantha. These Andhra cottons, Chanderis, Maheshwaris, Benaresis and Champa tussars come in all hues, ranging from cream to pastel, monochrome and indigo.WHERE: Ambara, Annaswamy Mudaliar Road, Ulsoor LakeWHEN: 10.30am-7pm, November 30 CALL: 9980188938Pravara art studio is back with its hit comedy Beg Borrow Aliya. It is plotted on the thoughts of vasudhaiva kutumbakam, which means ‘the world is one family’. The story revolves around Vishwa and his wife Vishalu, who are frantically looking for a groom for their daughter Laila. Things take a funny turn when not one but three potential grooms enter their lives, namely Babu, Ramu and Somu, plus inspectors Vikram and PC Basya, who are investigating a murder case.WHERE: Prabhath KH Kalasoudh, Hanumantha Nagar, BasavanagudiWHEN: 5pm & 7.30pm, November 30CALL: 9686869676Management consultant Suresh G Venkanna will launch his book Move On. A fictional journey, it takes Yogi from his cosy office in Chennai to a near-death experience in a swollen river in the Himalayas and finally to the streets of New Delhi where he is chased like a fugitive. In the course of the life-changing event, the complex character of Yogi is peeled layer by layer.WHERE: Atta Galatta, KHB Colony, 5th Block, KoramangalaWHEN: 5pm onwards, November 30CALL: 9632510126Christmas is in the air, so head to Bespoke Bazaar for your fill of festive needs. There’s something for all ages. An outdoor pop-up set on the beautifully manicured lawns covered by a marquee will feature over 30 brands, selling Christmas decor, clothes, jewellery, footwear, organic and gourmet food, home decor and more. Don’t forget to indulge in their selection of Mangalorean and French cuisineand beverages.WHERE: Raintree, No 4, Sankey Road, High Grounds, opposite Hotel ITC WindsorWHEN: 10am-7pm, November 30CALL: 22354396Ishtihaar is a collection of three short stories by Saadat Hasan Manto, which Deevas Gupta has woven together with poetry. Together, Manto’s blunt narration and Deevas’ satirical poems will not only teleport you to the times the stories were written in – during the partition, but will also make you realise how relevant these themes are even today.WHERE: Lahe Lahe, HAL 2nd Stage, KodihalliWHEN: 5pm & 7.30pm, November 30CALL: 9972045330
