There is a lot of opposition to the Citizenship Amendment Bill, likely to be presented in Parliament next week

The government is going to introduce the Citizenship Amendment Bill (CAB) in Parliament from next week. Under this bill, all religious minorities of Muslim-majority Afghanistan, Pakistan, and Bangladesh, ie Hindus, Sikhs, Buddhists, Jains, Parsis, and Christians will be eligible for Indian citizenship. In this connection, Union Home Minister Amit Shah is meeting with the Chief Ministers of North Eastern states and leaders of social and cultural bodies, student organizations and political parties from Friday. So that the plan to amend the Citizenship Act can be negotiated. This information has been given by an official of the Ministry of Home Affairs.

Jammu and Kashmir: 4 died, 3 seriously injured in gas cylinder blast in Ramban

Citizenship Act, 1955 has to be amended through the CAB Bill to grant Indian citizenship to the religious minorities of Afghanistan, Pakistan, and Bangladesh i.e. Hindus, Sikhs, Buddhists, Jains, Parsis and Christians. This was promised by BJP during the 2014 and 2019 Lok Sabha elections. CAB is facing heavy opposition, especially in the Northeast. For example, in the proposed amendment in Assam, there has been a concern that it will cancel the 1985 Assam Accord, which set the date of 24 March 1971 for the cut-off of deportation of all illegal immigrants.

Soon central government will bring a permanent solution to the problem of stubble

On the other hand, there is opposition to the bill in Mizoram because it will make Buddhist Dodge refugees Indian citizens. There have been protests in Tripura and Arunachal Pradesh regarding the proposed bill. Opposition parties such as the Congress, Trinamool Congress and CPI (Marxist) are strongly opposing it. These opposition parties say that the Constitution of India does not say to grant citizenship on the basis of religion. On the contrary, the BJP and its allies have insisted that the minorities of the three countries, which include a large number of Hindus, faced persecution there, so they should be given citizenship.

Supreme Court order: 'Criminal mistake' in minor state cannot be a hindrance in job
