London Bridge attacker said Jobseeker's Allowance could fund terror camps

Evil killer Usman Khan, 28, was recorded by police plotting a "Mumbai-style" series of terror attacks in the UK, saying benefits could pay for training camps in Kashmir

The London Bridge terrorist was recorded telling fellow jihadists that Jobseeker's Allowance cash could be used to fund training for fundamentalists.

Evil Usman Khan, 28, killed two innocent people and injured three more during yesterday's horror attack, which police believe he carried out alone.

Khan - who had previously been jailed for terror offences - was gunned down by cops after hero passers-by halted his rampage. He was wearing a fake suicide vest when he died.

Khan was released from prison just under a year ago after being jailed in 2012 for terror offences.

The jihadist was one of nine men jailed after police uncovered a plot to attack high-profile targets including Parliament and the London Stock Exchange.

They planned to carry out a "Mumbai-style" atrocity - replicating a series of 2008 attacks on the Indian city which killed more than 160 civilians.

Have you been affected by the London Bridge terror attack? Email webnews@mirror.co.uk

Image: @SnapperSK) @SnapperSK)

Khan's home in Stoke-on-Trent was bugged by intelligence services, and a wealth of incriminating evidence was collected against him.

In one conversation about terrorist fundraising, he said Muslims in Britain could earn in a day what people in Kashmir - a disputed region divided between Pakistan and India - are paid in a month.

He stated: "On jobseeker's allowance we can earn that, never mind working for that."

Khan said he could only see three results of the group's actions, saying: "There's victory, what we hope for, there's shahada (death as martyrs), or there's prison."

Image: Cliff Hide/LNP) Cliff Hide/LNP)

He had been secretly recorded talking about plans to recruit UK radicals to attend a training camp in Kashmir.

Khan was given an indeterminate sentence for "public protection" - meaning he could remain in jail beyond the end of his eight year sentence.

However the Court of Appeal overturned this, instead sentencing Khan to a 16-year term, with half being served behind bars.

He was released from prison after agreeing to wear an electronic tag and be monitored by authorities, the Times reports.

Image: Cliff Hide/LNP) Cliff Hide/LNP)

Image: PA) PA)

The newspaper said he was attending a Cambridge University conference on prisoner rehabilitation being held at Fishmongers' Hall yesterday and "threatened to blow up" the building before embarking on his attack at London Bridge.

Prosecutor Andrew Edis QC said in February 2012, when the nine were sentenced: "These defendants had in overview decided that ultimately they would be responsible for very serious acts of terrorism.

"What was observed during the indictment period was planning for the immediate future, not involving suicide attacks, so that there would be a long-term future which would include further acts of terrorism."

Image: PA) PA)

Khan and Nazam Hussain, 26, were given indeterminate sentences for public protection and to serve at least eight years behind bars, while Mohammed Shahjahan 27, was jailed for a minimum term of eight years and 10 months.

Passing sentence, the judge, Mr Justice Wilkie, said this was a "serious, long-term venture in terrorism" that could also have resulted in atrocities in Britain.

He said: "It was envisaged by them all that ultimately they and the other recruits may return to the UK as trained and experienced terrorists available to perform terrorist attacks in this country, on one possibility contemplated in the context of the return of British troops from Afghanistan."

The trio appealed their sentences and on April 16, 2013 had their indeterminate sentences quashed by the Court of Appeal, which instead imposed determinate custodial sentences.

Image: @SnapperSK) @SnapperSK)

Allowing their sentence appeals, Lord Justice Leveson, sitting with Mr Justice Mitting and Mr Justice Sweeney, ruled that Shahjahan now had to serve 17 years and eight months and Khan and Hussain 16 years.

such an offence should be incentivised to demonstrate that he can safely be released; such a decision is then better left to the Parole Board for consideration proximate in time to the date when release becomes possible."

The court of appeal's judgement stated: "The groups were clearly considering a range of possibilities including fundraising for the establishment of a military training madrassa in Pakistan, where they would undertake training themselves and recruit others to do likewise, sending letter bombs through the post, attacking public houses used by British racist groups, attacking a high profile target with an explosive device and a Mumbai-style attack."
