India, Japan Warn Pak; Tell It To Take Resolute Action Against Terror Outfits

India and Japan on Saturday deliberated on the threat posed to the regional security by terrorist networks operating from Pakistan and called upon Islamabad to take "resolute and irreversible" action against them and "fully comply" with international commitments to deal with terrorism, including the steps proscribed by the Financial Action Task Force (FATF). A joint statement in this regard was made during the inaugural meeting of the India-Japan Foreign and Defence Ministerial Dialogue (2+2).

Attended the first India-Japan 2+2 Foreign and Defence Ministerial Meeting in New Delhi today



We affirmed that this dialogue will further enhance the strategic depth of bilateral security and defence cooperation. A joint statement was issued after the meeting. pic.twitter.com/5cOkyIUxvt — Rajnath Singh (@rajnathsingh) November 30, 2019

Rajnath Singh and S Jaishankar led the Indian delegation

The Indian delegation at the meeting was led by Defence Minister Rajnath Singh and External Affairs Minister S Jaishankar, while the Japanese Delegation was led by country's Defence Minister Taro Kono and Foreign Minister Toshimitsu Motegi. The ministers condemned the growing threat of terrorism in the strongest terms and called upon all countries to take resolute action in rooting out terrorist safe havens and infrastructure, disrupting terrorist networks and eliminating financing channels and halting the cross-border movement of terrorists.

READ | Japan defence minister visits Hindan airbase

READ | India-Japan 2+2 dialogue of defence and foreign ministers deepens strategic ties

Both countries emphasised the need for stronger international partnership

The ministers underlined the need for all countries to ensure that all territory under their control is not used to launch terrorist attacks on other countries in any manner. They also emphasised the need for stronger international partnership in countering terrorism and violent extremism, including through increased sharing of information and intelligence.

The 2+2 meeting was held in pursuance of the decision taken by Prime Minister Narendra Modi and his Japanese counterpart Shinzo Abe during the 13th India-Japan Annual Summit held in Japan in October 2018, with an aim to institute a Foreign and Defence Ministerial Dialogue for further deepening bilateral security and defence cooperation. It provided an opportunity for the two sides to review the status of and exchange further views on strengthening defence and security cooperation between India and Japan so as to provide greater depth to the 'India-Japan Special Strategic and Global Partnership.

READ | India, Japan hold first 'two-plus-two' dialogue

READ | Japanese Defense Min goes onboard Indian Su-30 aircraft during visit to IAF base at Hindon

(With ANI inputs)
