‘Pak min’s Kartarpur claim has shown their evil designs’

Punjab CM called out Sheikh Rashid’s stand, saying he had bared Pak’s wicked intent behind the Corridor, which India looked as a bridge to peace



CHANDIGARH Punjab Chief Minister Amarinder Singh (in pic) on Sunday said Pakistan Railway Minister Sheikh Rashid’s disclosure that Kartarpur Corridor was the “brainchild” of their Army Chief Gen Qamar Javed Bajwa and it will hurt India forever had exposed Islamabad’s nefarious intent behind the initiative.



Singh expressed serious concern over this admission by the Pakistan minister and said that in validating his stand on the issue, Rashid had completely bared the wicked design of Pakistan behind the Corridor, which India had hoped would emerge as a bridge of peace between the two countries.



Given Rashid’s revelation, the chief minister also urged his former cabinet colleague Navjot Singh Sidhu to be cautious in his dealings with the Imran Khan government in Pakistan.



Singh took strong exception to Rashid’s remarks that “the Corridor would hurt India forever, which would forever remember the wound inflicted on it by Gen Bajwa with the Kartarpur Corridor.”



Terming it an open and blatant threat against India’s security and integrity, he warned Pakistan to not attempt to indulge in any misadventure against its neighbour.



“Don’t make the mistake of reading weakness in our gratitude for the opening of the Corridor,” he said, warning India would give a befitting response to any bid by Pakistan to attack its borders or its people.



Declaring that India would never let Pakistan fulfil its despicable ambitions, Singh said in a statement here that any such attempt by Islamabad would be met with retaliation of the kind that “they would never be able to survive”.



On Saturday, Rashid claimed the opening of the Corridor was the brainchild of Gen Bajwa and it will hurt India forever, contradicting his government’s assertion that the idea behind the initiative was of Prime Minister Imran Khan.



The Corridor, connecting Dera Baba Nanak in Gurdaspur district with the historic Gurdwara Darbar Sahib in Kartarpur, Pakistan, the final resting place of Guru Nanak Dev, was thrown open on November 9, three days ahead of the 550th birth anniversary of the Sikhism founder.



Prime Minister Narendra Modi inaugurated the portion of the Corridor falling on the Indian side while PM Khan inaugurated the part on the Pakistani side.


