75% Indians Believe That Government Can Deal With Terror Threats: Survey

Urban Indians were found to be concerned about all threats, whether about security, safety or health, though at the top of the heap was about security and safety – at least 87% of urban Indians polled fear a terror strike taking place in the country and 87% fear a natural disaster taking place in the country, revealed a report by Ipsos-Halifax World Affairs Global Threats Assessment.

"Despite taking major steps, India has been facing terror attacks. India has heavily invested in state of the art surveillance and scanning machines, yet given our vast geography and population, fear is lurking in the minds of urban Indians. Govt has been issuing safety warnings for the utmost vigilance to the citizens. Likewise, natural disasters occur due to climate change and it is a challenge and a threat," says Amit Adarkar, CEO, Ipsos India & Operations Director, APAC, Ipsos.

Perception of Threats

Further, majority of Indians enlist a number of threats facing the nation: 82% Indians fear being hacked for fraudulent or espionage purposes; 79 per cent fear a violent conflict breaking out between ethnic minority groups in the country; 78 per cent fear a nuclear, biological or chemical attack taking place somewhere in the world; 77 per cent feel threatened by India being involved in an armed conflict with another nation; 75% fear a major health epidemic breaking out in the country; 74 per cent fear personal safety of them and their family members being violated.

"I would say, urban Indians are riding on caution. A case of safety saves and it’s more a manifestation of being prepared for the worst, at the same time, taking measures that forestall ominous occurring. Also, these threats emanate from dangers lurking, that have surfaced at some point or the other in the past," added Adarkar.

How Confident are Indians of the ability of the govt to deal with these threats?

Confidence is high. For all threats. In some cases, the threat is larger than our ability to deal with it.

At least 75 per cent Indians feel govt can deal with terror strike taking place in the country and 77% confident about govt’s abilities in handling natural disaster taking place in the country. 70% confident of govt in dealing with threat of hacking for fraudulent or espionage purposes; 71% confident of govt’s ability to deal with violent conflict breaking out between ethnic minority groups in the country; 68% confident nuclear, biological or chemical attack taking place somewhere in the world will be dealt with; 77% confident India being involved in an armed conflict with another nation can be averted or dealt with; 75% confident major health epidemic breaking out in the country can be handled; 69% confident personal safety of them and their family members being violated can be averted or handled.

Interestingly, at least 79% of urban Indians polled feel things are improving than worsening. Though 77% of urban Indians polled feel that compared to last year, the world has become more dangerous.
