Telangana CM KCR’s ‘save our women’ comment triggers row, KTR clarifies

Telangana CM KCR’s ‘save our women’ comment triggers row, KTR clarifies

While KCR was referring to RTC women during his speech, it was misreported by a section of the media, and taken out of context.

news Controversy

A row has erupted after National Commission for Women (NCW) Chairperson Rekha Sharma lashed out at Telangana Chief Minister K Chandrasekhar Rao over a statement that the Telangana Rashtra Samithi (TRS) chief reportedly made.

Taking to Twitter, Rekha Sharma said, "Shocked to hear Telangana CM saying that women should be home by 8 pm. Are women prisoners for life and have to stay indoors to keep themselves safe? And are crimes not happening inside the homes? Women have equal rights at public places and we need to teach this to Honorable CM."

Rekha was referring to a statement made by KCR, during an interaction with selected employees of the Telangana State Road Transport Corporation (TSRTC) in Hyderabad, after they called off a strike that lasted for over 52 days.

Shocked to hear @TelanganaCMO saying that women should be home by 8 pm.Are women prisoners for life and have to stay in door to keep themselves safe? And are crimes not happening inside the homes?

Women have equal rights at public places and we need to teach this to Honorable CM December 2, 2019

Agreeing to the demand made by striking workers that women employees should not be given night duties, KCR said that the government will ensure that they will get off work by 8 pm.

"I have a responsibility to save our women, so their shifts will end by 8 pm," KCR said in the meeting.

While the word 'save' is problematic, as the state government is duty-bound to protect its citizens and not 'save' them, KCR was referring to RTC women during the speech. It was later misreported in a certain part of the media, that he was referring to all women in the state. This was also taken out of context, as the state is grappling with the brutal rape and murder of a 27-year-old veterinarian at the outskirts of Hyderabad.

Clarifying the same, Minister for Municipal Administration and Urban Development (MAUD) KT Rama Rao, who is also KCR's son, responded to Rekha Sharma.

"Madam, you’re in an extremely important position and I request you to kindly do a fact check before reacting. The Telangana CM has NOT made any such statement. Unfortunately some irresponsible media outlets, in their pursuit for TRP ratings have been spreading sheer nonsense," he tweeted.

Madam, you’re in an extremely important position & I request you to kindly do a fact check before reacting. Hon’ble @TelanganaCMO has NOT made any such statement



Unfortunately some irresponsible media outlets, in their pursuit for TRP ratings have been spreading sheer Nonsense https://t.co/4fBmoxo9M0 — KTR (@KTRTRS) December 2, 2019

Meanwhile, protests were held for a third consecutive day in Telangana and Andhra Pradesh, demanding death penalty for the four accused in the case, which has sent shock waves across the state.

The veterinarian was gangraped and murdered by four truck drivers and cleaners near a toll gate close to Outer Ring Road at Shamshabad on November 27.

According to police, the accused trapped the victim by deflating one of the tyres of her scooty and later offering to fix it. After killing the victim, they carried the body in their truck near Shadnagar town and set it ablaze.

The Cyberabad police on November 29 arrested all four accused and the next day a magistrate in Shadnagar town sent them to judicial custody. The accused are currently lodged in Cherlapally Jail in Hyderabad.

KCR on Sunday directed officials to conduct trial in a fast-track court and ensure that the accused get stringent punishment.

Read: Hyderabad vet murder: Accused was caught for no license 2 days before crime, escaped
