CBI vs Kolkata police: Mamata establishes herself as the Opposition leader to take on Modi

West Bengal Chief Minister Mamata Banerjee. | File image

Beyond the debate over constitutional propriety & the Centre-state relationship, the showdown between CBI sleuths & Kolkata police has provided an unprecedented chance to settle the debate over who is best placed to take on Prime Minister Narendra Modi. While opposition leaders telephoned the Bengal Chief Minister or declared their support to her on social media platforms, by taking the fight to the Opposition’s camp, the TMC supremo has shown the guts & the gall to take Modi & his administration head-on.

While Mamata Banerjee herself had said that the choice of Prime Minister will only be decided only after the polls in the January rally attended by all anti-NDA leaders, each regional satrap was playing a waiting game to see the Lok Sabha results before jumping onto the race for the hot seat. But by making the CBI vs Kolkata police face-off political, Mamata Banerjee has given a wider message – that it’s only TMC under her which won’t cow down before the Centre’s might - that she & only she can see the powerful Prime Minister & the BJP president Amit Shah in the eye, without blinking even once.

Even after the Supreme Court asked the Kolkata police commissioner to make himself available before the investigating agency, the TMC chief has claimed victory on the fact that for now CBI cannot arrest the top cop. Remember, Lalu Prasad Yadav was hailed as the mascot of secularism when he dared to arrest LK Advani leading the Rath yatra in 1990 & political pundits would cite the example of another Yadav leader – Mulayam Singh – who earned the sobriquet of ‘Mullah Mulayam’ after his forces fired at Kar sevaks. For both of them the secular tag served them well & for years.

Such optics do matter & more so in politics. When the Opposition is looking for a candidate to take on the might of Modi-Shah duo the recent milieu in Kolkata has provided the springboard to exploit the situation politically.

Since the last 4 years, TMC MPs like Kunal Ghosh, the party’s leader in Lok Sabha & former minister Sudip Bandopadhyay, lawmakers like Tapas Paul & Srinjoy Bose & her own long-time colleague & transport minister in her cabinet Madan Mitra were all arrested in the Ponzi scheme. Beyond issuing warnings, Mamata Banerjee didn’t take to the streets.

When BJP leader & in charge of West Bengal Sidharth Nath Singh pointed a finger at TMC leaders on being involved in Saradha scam, the West Bengal Chief Minister made it into a personal war & vowed to fight back. But that was it. When BJP’s vote share in Bengal is not even half of TMC’s, taking the battle to the Opposition camp suggests one thing – she wants to establish herself as the rallying point of all anti-BJP forces. And for that purpose, the confrontationist approach & a little bit of saber-rattling is definitely going to help her cause.

If one takes a look objectively at the whole issue the firebrand politician in Bengal had nothing against her - not even being mentioned in hushed tone or through leaks by investigative agencies vis-à-vis Saradha scam. It was her top cop – the Kolkata police commissioner Rajiv Kumar – who was summoned by the CBI for questioning over the multi-crore Saradha chit fund case. Before the Chit fund scam was transferred by the Supreme Court to CBI it was Rajiv Kumar who headed the SIT (Special Investigation Team) formed by the West Bengal government. In fact, the CBI, after being pulled up the court on delay over the inquiry had cited lack of cooperation from the state sleuths in providing information.

The big political fight which culminated with CBI sleuths being taken to police station on last Sunday has its genesis with latest political events or the ham-handedness of the state government which prevented the saffron brigade from taking out a rathyatra. The BJP’s state unit had to run from pillar to post to arrange a venue for Amit Shah’s meeting in Bengal & there were widespread allegations of BJP supporters being attacked while they were returning from Amit Shah’s meeting. Even Yogi Adityanath was denied permission to land his chopper & had to land in Jharkhand & take the road to meet supporters in Purulia, one of the districts bordering the BJP-ruled Jharkhand.

For a state which tops Sangh Parivar’s wish list of establishing its own government, the battle for the political supremacy has just begun. While Akhilesh & Mayawati can give the BJP a run for its money in caste coalition, AAP can manage to consolidate the underlings Mamata Banerjee is a street fighter – something that Modi-Shah has hardly been up against. By taking the fight to the Opposition camp, she has killed two birds with one stone – established her credibility as the most formidable anti-BJP leader & made it clear that BJP will have to fight for every square inch in West Bengal.

The views expressed by the author are personal and do not in any way represent those of Times Network.
