Mamata didi’s antics – A view point

West Bengal chief minister Mamata Banerjee has been in the news for last few days for her confrontation with the Centre. In her dictionary Centre here means Mr Narendra Modi, Mr Amit Shah and BJP. To any aware citizen it is obvious that her stance has nothing to do with any propriety that the Centre may not have followed with regards to the methodology of questioning her state’s senior police officer Mr Rajeev Kumar. It is more a show of strength on her home turf and a ploy to ensure that people of Bengal vote for her party in the coming elections if she can show BJP in bad light and project herself as a strong leader. Of course like all power hungry politicians she too is looking beyond West Bengal this time with hopes of marking her presence at the Centre in case BJP fails to form a government for a second term.

There is a lot of talk about misuse and scuttling of autonomy of country’s institutions like Reserve Bank of India, CBI and others by BJP government in the last four years. If this is so then one question becomes very pertinent. All these institutions have grown and developed under governments run by Congress and its allies, which include TMC, for over six decades since independence. If their character and foundations are so weak that they become subservient to the government of the day overnight then obviously Congress and its allies have done a very shoddy job of nurturing these institutions. It also goes without saying that perhaps these political parties wanted such institutions to dance to the tunes of the political masters instead of being strong, apolitical and autonomous in their approach. If that be so then why blame BJP today. As they say ‘as you sow so shall you reap’.

Politicians are known to be opportunists and Indian politicians more so. So TMC leader’s exploitation of the situation can be expected, particularly with elections only a few months away. But will Mr Rajeev Kumar answer as to why his state’s chief minister is ready to fight so hard and confront the Centre on his behalf? Obviously, there is much more here than what meets the eye. Has Mr Kumar done something for his political masters for which the chief minister is indebted to him? Or is he holding some crucial information that his chief minister does not want to fall in the hands of investigating agencies? Why is Ms Mamata Banerjee so afraid of the investigations involving the Saradha and Rose Valley scams? These embarrassing questions are a natural fall out of West Bengal CM’s actions and Mr Kumar’s conduct.

The main problem here is that our administrative services and police have played into the hands of politicians from decades. They have sold their souls to political master for personal favours and career progressions. They follow their political masters with their tongues hanging out. These are strong words indeed. But look at what is happening around among senior police officers. Within CBI its Director and his deputy, both career police officers from IPS, were busy pursuing their personal agendas instead of working as a team in the best interest of the organisation and thereby the nation. Each one was investigating the other through key officers in the organisation loyal to them. Loyalties of Rajeev Kumar, Commissioner of Police in West Bengal, lie more with the Chief Minister of the state and in the bargain, he fails to do his job in a sincere, impartial and honest manner. When he is asked to appear for questioning by CBI he dictates his terms and says he will meet them only at a mutual place? What makes him so brazen is the political clout that he has courted over the years. So much so that his Chief Minister takes to the streets on his behalf and he joins her in this shameful act in his uniform. Imagine a senior police officer sitting on dharna with politicians on the streets of Kolkata instead of enforcing law and order. Instead of maintaining law and order he is actually abetting in its destruction.

Ms Mamata Banerjee talks a lot about saving democracy that as per her is being murdered by Mr Modi and his government. Where were her democratic concerns when she put all kinds of obstructions in the path of BJP and its leaders when they wished to hold political rallies in her state? Was this not murder of democratic traditions and norms? After all BJP leaders have been canvassing in the state for decades and it will be foolish to assume that they did not follow the basic protocols necessary to hold such rallies. If anything, given Ms Mamata’s obvious enmity towards BJP, the party authorities would have over ensured that proper procedures were followed. It may not be wrong to surmise that she is possibly scared of BJP making sizeable gains in her backyard. Surprisingly all other opposition parties have a free run in the state to hold their rallies where they curse BJP and eulogise Mamata Didi- may be that says it all. What about the rap she and her government received from Supreme Court (SC) over the conduct of Panchayat Elections two years ago? The Honourable court observed that it was a clear case where democracy was not working at grass root level in the state. This was in view of the fact that opposition candidates were either forced to withdraw their nominations or subjected to extreme violence by TMC in the whole state so that TMC nominees could be elected unopposed.

Next, in a democratic federal structure, centre and states have to cooperate in many ways. There will be occasions when some procedural issues will come up. However the same must be sorted out through administrative channels and not by confrontation or taking to the streets. By allowing Mr Rajeev Kumar to be part of her street agitation against the central government, has the CM not mocked country’s democratic structure that warrants police to be apolitical? As far as Mr Rajeev Kumar is concerned, it is time IPS authorities initiate strict disciplinary action against him for dishonouring his uniform, displaying his political affiliations so brazenly and for breach of police code of conduct by being part of a political agitation. It may be pertinent to recall here that both Mr Narendra Modi and Mr Amit Shah were subjected to extreme forms of scrutiny and examination by successive Congress governments for over a decade in connection with Gujarat riots of 2002 and other cases. To their credit they neither asked the CBI to get out of Gujarat nor did they ever resort to confrontation with Centre. They allowed investigators to do their job unlike what is happening in West Bengal today.

It is unfortunate that West Bengal chief minister has shown more interest and concern to scuttle the scam investigations but is immune to the concerns of thousands of common people who have lost the money that they had invested. One can understand Ms Banerjee’s personal distaste for Mr Modi, but not upholding the stature of the institution of Prime Minister of India is something that cannot be condoned. There is enough evidence to show that there have been massive financial frauds in both Saradha and Rose Valley Chit Fund Schemes and law has already taken cognisance of the same. She is weakening her own case by insulting the institution of the Prime Minister of India, confronting the centre for political gains and not allowing an impartial investigation of the two scams in her state. Sooner or later her bluff will be called out.

Facebook Twitter Linkedin Email Disclaimer Views expressed above are the author's own.
