Marshalling Youth: Governor’s Statement Triggers Row

Srinagar

Governor Satya Pal Malik on Wednesday said that nobody should take former Chief Minister Mehbooba Mufti’s statements seriously as her PDP was breaking up and she was trying to save the party by commenting against the forces and India’s political system.

“It is election time and her party is breaking up and in a bad shape,” Governor was quoted by ANI saying. “She had come to power by supporting such elements. Nobody should take her statements seriously.”

Malik said her statements will not affect the morale of the security forces.

Governor was apparently reacting to Mehbooba’s Tuesday statement in the SMHS hospital where she demanded action against an Army officer, who allegedly beat a man from Pulwama and threatened to kill him in an encounter.

She had gone to see the welfare of the young man who was beaten by an army officer after summoning to his camp. The youth is the brother of a soldier whose father was killed by militants earlier.

In a reply to Governor, Mehbooba took to Twitter wrote: “Instead of taking cognizance of the brutality that the young boy has been subjected to, and ordering action against the culprits, it is sad that the honourable governor is talking politics instead. Saddened to see the constitutional authorities taking sides so brazenly.”

“Kashmir is a political issue and can’t be resolved through military power. Army men hailed as heroes for their bravery also need to be held accountable if they commit human rights violations,” Mehbooba tweeted.

“So please lets call a spade a spade instead of accusing us of demonising the army. I have also spoken to the Core Commander to take note of this incident,” she added.

Prior to Mehbooba, it was Omar Abdullah who strongly reacted to the Governor’s utterances. “Governor Sb this is an unacceptable statement & an unnecessary interference in politics. At this rate, it won’t be long before people stop taking Raj Bhavan seriously so please consider the office you occupy before you give statements.”
