DUTA Strike Updates: Teachers march to VC's office, students left in lurch

DUTA Strike Updates: DU Exams likely to be affected | Photo Credit: Getty Images

DUTA Strike Update @ 12:55 pm: Hundreds of Delhi University Teachers have called for an indefinite strike. DUTA is demanding a one time absorption of the 4500 ad-hoc teachers that were currently working at the Delhi University. Protesting teachers have marched to the VC's office, demanding recall of the August 28 letter. In the meanwhile, the thousands of DU students who are currently writing ther examinations are left in lurch. The teachers have warned of boycotting the invigilation duties and all work which would mean delay in the on-going scheduled examination.

Funny how I'm on the way to sit for my exams unsure whether there will be invagilators or not.#DUTA strike — tenzin sang (@tenzin_sang) December 4, 2019

Delhi University Teachers Association, DUTA has called for an indefinite strike against DUPA’s decision not to confirm the 4500 ad-hoc teachers. DUTA further wants the HRD Ministry and UGC to address their demands and bring out one time notice to absorb all the ad-hoc teachers. Teachers are seeking immediate redressal of their demands, failing which the teachers would boycott the on-going semester examinations. If this was to be implemented, thousands of Delhi University students are likely to be affected.

In the notice issued by DUTA, the teachers have shared that they would not take up invigilation duties or checking of the answer sheets. With the term end examination currently underway, the strike could lead to disruption of many student’s academic plans.

The teachers are demanding that DUPA or Delhi University Principal’s Association withdraws the circular dated August 28, 2019. The letter has put the joining of the ad-hoc teachers working at the varsity in abeyance. At present, a total of 9000 teachers are part of the Delhi University. Out of these, 4500 are ad-hoc teachers.

The salaries of the said teachers have also been put on hold. The circular had further stated that the ‘appointment of guest teachers can be made against substantive vacancies arising for the first time in the current academic session.’

The teachers are expected to assemble at the Arts Faculty at 11 am today. More updates on the DUTA strike and its direct impact on Delhi University examinations would be provided here once available. At present, however, the examinations are expected to go on as planned.
