GATE 2020: IIT Delhi releases important notice for students against fake messages, extends correction window

GATE 2020: Important notice released for candidates | Photo Credit: Thinkstock

Indian Institute of Technology, IIT Delhi has released important notices for students who have applied for the Graduate Aptitude Test in Engineering or GATE 2020. In the official notice, which is also available on gate.iitd.ac.in, the institute has warned students against the malicious phishing messages some students are getting. The institute has also asked students to correct or rectify the defects in the applications and has extended the last date for correction.

Recently many students have reported receiving messages from ‘GATE’ regarding filling some details on a given link. IIT Delhi has reiterated that the institute is not sending any such messages to the students and that these are phishing attempts that the students should be wary on. Furthermore, all students have been informed that there is no ‘specially designed test series for GATE aspirants’ that the authority has sent.

Furthermore, the authority has released the list of candidates whose application is on hold due to various concerns. All such candidates have been advised to correct the concerns and the date has been extended till 5:00 pm on December 6, 2019. The list of following candidates have been provided who

Didn't provide valid Eligibility Certificate Whose Category/PwD/Dyslexia Certificate is invalid – candidates who fail to do would be considered as general candidates and would have to pay an additional fee of Rs. 750 by the extended time (not applicable for female candidates). Whose Photograph/Signature are not as per the guidelines

The lists are available on the official website gate.iitd.ac.in. All these candidates are advised to rectify the errors, failing which their applications would be rejected.

Apart from these, GATE 2020 examination schedule was also released as well as the mock tests for the examination. The GATE 2020 admit cards would be released on January 3, 2020 and the examination would be conducted on February 1, 2, 8 and 9.
