Double Trouble: Two Depressions over Arabian Sea; Cyclone Pawan to Form on Tuesday

File photo of Lakshadweep as Cyclone Maha crossed the island a month ago. (TOI Kochi / BCCL)

A low-pressure area, formed on Sunday over the equatorial Indian Ocean and adjoining southwest Arabian Sea, intensified into a depression on Monday and into a deep depression on Tuesday morning. The rapidly intensifying system is likely to concentrate further into a cyclonic storm—eighth over the north Indian Ocean this year—by Tuesday evening.

Once the system intensifies into a cyclone, it will be named Pawan, as per the naming guidelines set by the World Meteorological Organisation (WMO). The storm is will pose no threat to India as it is likely to move away from the west coast. The depression is likely to move in the northwestward direction, towards Somalia coast during the next four days.

Meanwhile, the India Meteorological Department (IMD) has warned of a new low-pressure area, which was also formed on Sunday over the southeast Arabian Sea. The system has concentrated into a well-marked low-pressure area in the neighbouring region of Lakshadweep. It is likely to intensify further into a depression by Wednesday morning.

Two systems active over the Arabian Sea (weather.com/en-IN/)

Under the influence of the latter system, light to moderate rains are forecast across Lakshadweep, Kerala, Tamil Nadu, coastal and south Karnataka, south Maharasthra and Goa during the next 24 to 48 hours. Heavy rainfall is likely at isolated places in Lakshadweep till Wednesday morning.

Advertisement Strong winds and very rough sea conditions are forecast around Lakshadweep area, the southeast Arabian Sea, and along Kerala, Karnataka, Goa and Maharashtra coasts. Fishers are advised not to venture out in these areas till Wednesday.

The name 'Pawan' for the next cyclone has been set as per suggestion by Sri Lanka. The naming of cyclones follows the guidelines set by the WMO, which stipulates that the countries in the region must name storms in any ocean basin. For the north Indian Ocean, eight countries suggest the names, including India. Pakistan named the last cyclone 'Bulbul', which had hit the Sundarbans Delta in West Bengal and Bangladesh.

Cyclone Pawan will be the eighth cyclone to form over the north Indian Ocean this year. During the entirety of 2018, seven cyclonic storms formed over the northern Indian Ocean basin. It was only in 1976, that more than seven cyclones formed over the north Indian Ocean, making this year a rare exception.

**

For weather & air quality updates on the go, download The Weather Channel App (on Android and iOS store). It's free!
