Intelligence reports reveal LeT plans to assassinate Jammu and Kashmir BJP chief Ravinder Raina

Jammu and Kashmir state BJP chief Ravinder Raina | Photo Credit: PTI

Key Highlights According to the intelligence input, LeT terrorists, who entered the Valley on December 1, planned to carry out a Fidayeen-style attack on Raina In June, Raina had claimed that he was on the hitlist of Hizbul Mujahideen

Srinagar: Jammu and Kashmir BJP president Ravinder Raina has been put on a high alert after intelligence reports suggested that he is on the terror hit list of the Lashkar-e-Taiba (LeT). According to the latest intelligence report accessed by Times Now, Lashkar operatives, who have infiltrated into the Kashmir Valley, are planning to target Raina and two other BJP leaders in the Valley. Keeping in view, the intelligence agencies contacted Raina and have asked him to follow security protocols. Security has also been beefed up around the BJP leader.

Commenting on the development, Raina told Times Now that the threats to assassinate will not deter him from working for the people of the Valley and added that he will continue to visit his constituency.

According to the intelligence report, LeT terrorists including one Ghazi Baba from Pakistan-occupied Kashmir (PoK), entered the Valley on December 1 with the intention to carry out a fidayeen attack on the BJP leader. This is not the first time terror threats have been issued to Raina. In June, he had claimed that he was on the hitlist of Hizbul Mujahideen (HM).

Pakistan-backed terror groups have vehemently threatened to carry out attacks against India since the abrogation of Article 370 in Jammu and Kashmir. On August 5, the government revoked the special status of Jammu and Kashmir by abrogating Article 370, a move that was criticised by Pakistan on international platforms. Pakistan's attempts to gain traction were, however, met with a muted response from the international community, including world bodies such as the United Nations.

In an admission of sorts, Pakistan's Prime Minister Imran Khan had also issued indirect threats of a nuclear war with India over Kashmir. Addressing the United Nations General Assembly (UNGA) in New York in September, Khan had appealed Islamic nations to unite against India.
