Unnao Rape Survivor, Set Ablaze On Her Way To Court, Shifted To Safadarjung Hospital In Delhi

New Delhi:

Unnao rape victim, who is battling with her life after being set on fire by her accused, was Thursday moved from Lucknow to Delhi's Safdarjung Hospital for treatment. The Lucknow police created a green corridor and took her to the airport from where she was airlifted to Delhi. Doctors say that the woman has suffered 70 per cent burn injuries and is in critical condition.

The brutal incident took place on Thursday morning when the accused, out on bail, doused her with kerosene and set aflame. The woman was on her way to Raebareli to attend the hearing in the rape case when she was attacked.

According to the details emerging through various media reports, the women ran for a kilometre shouting for help after being set on fire and called the ambulance herself. After committing the crime, the accused were stayed at their home and arrested by the police.

This is the third such case where a woman was raped or sexually assaulted and then set on fire. Last month, a veterinary doctor was gangraped and burnt in Hyderabad’s high-security area, which is just 5 minutes away from the Hyderabad airport. In yet another brutal case of suspected rape and murder, a girl was shot dead and burnt after being allegedly sexually assaulted in Kukudha village of Bihar's Buxar district.

The Opposition Congress has slammed the Yogi Adityanath government over the law-and-order situation in the state and threatened to hit the streets. "It is strange that even after such heinous cases, the BJP government is patting its back. The accused, who were in jail, come out and commit another crime. No one is safe in the state," UPCC chief Ajay Kumar Lallu said, adding that the Congress was standing firmly with the victims of such incidents and would fight for them from the House to the streets.

Crime Against Women On The Rise Under Current Regime

The recently released NCRB data shows disturbing, upward trend of crime against women. As many as 3,59,849 cases of crime against women were registered across the country in 2017, continuing the upward trend for the third consecutive year, the latest National Crime Records Bureau (NCRB) data released on Monday showed.

In 2015, 3,29,243 cases of crimes against women were registered and 3,38,954 cases were registered in 2016. The cases categorised as crimes against women include murder, rape, dowry death, suicide abetment, acid attack, cruelty against women and kidnapping, etc.

For all the Latest Crime News, Download News Nation Android and iOS Mobile Apps.
