Arabian Sea to see 5th cyclone, Pawan, this year

The waters of the Arabian sea have already seen four cyclonic formations this year - Vayu (June 10-17), Hikka (September 22-25), Kyarr (October 24 - November 2) and Maha (October 30 to November 7).

Chennai: Equalling a 117-year-old record, another cyclone has brewed in the Arabian Sea, the fifth this year. The last such occurrence dates back to 1902 when the Arabian Sea witnessed a record five cyclones, with four of them turning 'severe'.

The waters of the Arabian sea have already seen four cyclonic formations this year - Vayu (June 10-17), Hikka (September 22-25), Kyarr (October 24 - November 2) and Maha (October 30 to November 7).

While Cyclone Vayu and Cyclone Hikka became 'very severe' cyclonic storms, cyclone Maha turned 'extremely severe' and Cyclone Kyarr intensified into a super cyclone. Maha and Kyarr were formed simultaneously over the sea, a very rare occurrence, according to meteorologists.

The new cyclone, named Cyclone Pawan, formed over Southwest Arabian Sea “is heading for Somalia and is at present, 300 km away from the coastline of Somalia and 800 km south southeast of Salala in Oman,”, according to Skymet weather update.

'The cyclone will not see further intensification and will steadily lose its strength. The storm will have a westward track in the coming, after which it will move southwards. Pawan will strike about 200 km north of the capital city, Mogadishu on December 7. India is not likely to be affected by the storm, due to it being far away from the Indian coastline', read the update.

Meanwhile, the depression over the east-central Arabian Sea, which was formed simultaneously moved west-northwestwards weakened into a well-marked low-pressure area and lay over east-central the Arabian sea, according to the latest IMD forecast bulletin.

On account of these cyclonic storms, the Indian fisheries department has imposed a 2-day ban on fishing in Ramanathapuram. Over 3,000 fishing boats remain anchored to the shore here.
