Catastrophic slowdown: PC

ROBINSINGH@TRIBUNE.COM

New Delhi, December 5

Out from Tihar jail after 106 days, former Finance Minister P Chidambaram today launched a scathing attack on the government for “catastrophic economic slowdown” and continued clampdown in the Kashmir valley.

“The Prime Minister has been unusually silent on the economy. He has left it to his ministers to indulge in bluff and bluster…. If the diagnosis of the problem is wrong, the prescription is bound to be fatal,” he said.

Chidambaram also said his first thoughts upon being released from Tihar jail last night were for the people of Kashmir. “As I breathed the air of freedom at 8 pm last night, my first thoughts and prayers were for the 75 lakh people of the Kashmir valley who have been denied their basic freedoms since August 4. I am particularly concerned about the political leaders who have been detained without charges. Freedom is indivisible. If we must preserve our freedom, we must fight for their freedom,” said the former minister. He said he wanted to go to the Valley should the government allow him.

Claiming that his record as minister had been absolutely clear, Chidambaram concentrated most part of his attack on the state of the economy saying the falling GDP growth numbers summed up the current mess.

“Even after seven months into the fiscal year, the BJP government believes that the problems faced by the economy are cyclical. The government is wrong,” he said, accusing the BJP of being stubborn in defending “catastrophic mistakes” like demonetisation and “flawed” GST.

The Congress veteran added that nothing summed up the state of the economy better than the following series of numbers. “8, 7, 6.6, 5.8, 5 and 4.5…Those are the quarterly growth rates of GDP in the last six quarters,” he said, saying every number pointed to a floundering economy.

Chidambaram, who was in jail for alleged corruption in the INX Media case, today said as a principle, he would not comment on his matter which was sub judice, but added, “Sleeping on a wooden board without a pillow has strengthened my neck, spine and head.”

The former minister warned the government against being in denial and expressed concern on a “near-absent” demand. He claimed the Congress and some other parties were better equipped to pull the economy out of the slowdown, but “we have to wait for better times”. — TNS

Assembly gate shut, Bengal Guv fumes

West Bengal Governor Jagdeep Dhankhar was made to wait outside the Assembly as gate designated for his entry was locked

“This has put our democratic history to shame. This is not an insult to me, but an insult to people and Constitution,” said an angry Guv

The Trinamool Congress accused Guv of overstepping his brief. “He is trying to create an anarchic situation in Bengal. He is aspiring to become administrative head of the state,” it said.

Duel over rising prices

I don’t eat onion & garlic

I belong to a family which does not eat onion and garlic…. The govt has taken several steps to check rising prices of onion and to improve technology for its better storage. Nirmala Sitharaman, FM

What does FM eat, Avacados?

Her statement shows the mindset of this government. I don’t eat onions… she is saying to onion-eating people. What does she mean? What does she eat? Avacados? P Chidambaram, Cong Leader
