citizenship amendment bill in parliament If you give citizenship to all communities, we will accept Citizenship Amendment Bill, says Mamata Banerjee

Mamata Banerjee says she will support the bill if it provides citizenship to all religions | Photo Credit: ANI

Key Highlights If you discriminate on the basis of religion we will fight against it - Banerjee said The bill will be tabled in the Parliament on Monday

Kolkata: West Bengal Chief Minister Mamata Banerjee, on Friday, said that if the Citizenship Amendment Bill (CAB) is tweaked to give citizenship to all the communities, then her party will support it. She further alleged that CAB and National Register of Citizens (NRC) are being taken up to divert the attention from the economic slowdown and said that the two are sides of the same coin.

"If you give citizenship to all the communities we will accept it. But if you discriminate on the basis of religion we will fight against it," Banerjee said. "NRC and CAB being taken up to divert attention from the economic slowdown," she claimed, adding, "NRC and CAB two sides of the same coin. Will oppose both of

them tooth and nail."

Congress, TMC and the Left have vehemently opposed the CAB, claiming that it discriminating on religious grounds. The bill, which was cleared by the Union Cabinet on Wednesday, will be tabled in the Parliament on Monday. Congress has already clarified that it will oppose the bill. "Congress party is against any form of discrimination against anybody in this country. So, anybody who discriminates against anybody who is Indian, we are against them. That is our line. We believe that India belongs to everybody-- all communities, all religions, all cultures," party leader Rahul Gandhi told reporters on Thursday.

The bill, which was presented by the government in the previous Lok Sabha, was not tabled in the Rajya Sabha following massive protests against it. The bill seeks to grant citizenship to Hindus, Buddhists, Sikhs, Christians and Jains who have been displaced from Pakistan, Bangladesh and Afghanistan, due to religious persecution. Student groups from the northeast have been protesting against the bill claiming that it violates the Assam Accord of 1985 which sets March 24, 1971, as the cut-off date for deportation of illegal immigrants from Bangladesh.
