Unnao rape victim’s dad wants Hyderabad-like ‘punishment’

(The victim's identity has not been revealed to protect her privacy as per Supreme Court directives on cases related to sexual assault)

Unnao rape victim dies due to cardiac arrest in Delhi’s Safdarjung Hospital

UNNAO: The Unnao rape victim 's father as well as the people in her village on Friday hailed the Hyderabad police action in which all four accused in the veterinarian’s rape and murder were shot in a pre-dawn encounter.Her father said, “Justice was quick and this is the right move. I wish swift justice is meted out in my daughter’s case too. This will send a strong message that committing a heinous crime would have a bloody end and create fear in monsters like Shivam, who secure bail and again commit crime.”While the 23-year-old victim’s father is still in Unnao, her mother and elder brother had accompanied her to Delhi’s Safdarjung hospital, where she breathed her last late Friday night after battling for life with 90% burns suffered when she was set afire on Thursday morning, allegedly by the gang rape accused.“I appreciate the action of Hyderabad police in which four accused in the doctor’s rape and murder were killed. Had the same men fled, one could imagine how unsafe our sisters and daughters would have been. It will set a good precedent as perpetrators would realize that justice will be instant,” he added.Stating that people have lost faith in justice system, he said: “I have seen people running from pillar to post for justice when I would accompany my daughter to court last year. Why does the legal process take so long? Police must set a deadline in such cases and file a chargesheet quickly.”His feelings were echoed by the villagers, who said the police encounter will act as a deterrent. “The Hyderabad police action will send a strong signal to those who indulge in crime against women. It will act as a strong deterrent against heinous crimes like rape and assaults of women,” said a villager.“I know this was a serious and sensitive issue for the entire nation, and people have started debating. But, I am very happy and satisfied with the Hyderabad police action. Now, UP police too should set such an example to deal with the monsters of the society like those who set the gang rape survivor on fire,” said a sweetmeat shop owner.A group of college girls also welcomed the development, saying it will serve as a lesson for those who attempt such crimes.
