Boozy Brit threatened to kill cabin crew after being sacked on first day of dream job in Indonesia

Get the latest Scottish crime and courts news sent straight to your inbox with our daily Criminal Record newsletter

A dejected Briton who went on a drunken rampage during a 7,337 mile flight back to the UK just hours after he was sacked on only his first day of a dream job in Indonesia was behind bars today.

Liam Preston, 36, had been offered the chance of an exotic new life in Jakarta but when he arrived in the Indonesian capital city he discovered he had lost his passport - and was promptly fired and sent home.

Later whilst on the last leg of his epic 24 hour journey back to Britain via two connecting flights, crestfallen conveyor company worker Preston got drunk in his seat - then snapped at cabin crew when they confiscated his duty free Jack Daniels whisky.

During the meltdown, staff assured Preston he would get the bottle back when the plane landed - but he kissed the biceps on his arms as a "demonstration of strength" and warned: "I will smash your face in - I will kill you right now."

(Image: Liam Preston/ Cavendish Press)

Shortly afterwards as the Jet Airways flight touched down in Manchester and was taxi-ing to a terminal, fellow passengers and crew had to restrain Preston when he leapt from his seat and began flailing his arms around in the aisles.

Security staff boarded the aircraft but found Preston lying on the floor and refusing to get to his feet. He then pretended to punch one guard, hugged and kissed him on the cheek instead - before headbutting him and spitting in his face.

It emerged Preston had been offered the post in Indonesia after splitting up his wife but misplaced his passport during a connecting flight. He was condemned to fly home via connections at Bangkok in Thailand then Mumbai, India after his former spouse agreed to pay the cheapest flight home due to him not having enough money.

At Minshull Street Crown Court , Manchester, Preston, of Corby, Northamptonshire wept as he was locked up for six months after he pleaded guilty to being drunk on an aircraft, using threatening and abusive behaviour and assault by beating.

(Image: Liam Preston/ Cavendish Press)

The incident on board Flight 9W130 from Mumbai last November 29, began at 6am when Preston was heard to be singing loudly in his seat.

Prosecutor Juliet Berry said: "The flight was due to land at 7.40am and cabin crew became aware of the defendant sat in row 34. He was wearing headphones and listening to music and was singing loudly disturbing other passengers, some of whom were asleep.

"Staff asked him to be quiet and offered him a pillow and he took the pillow and they watched as he tried to get some sleep. He did go to sleep, but started singing again. The defendant then asked for a can of beer, but staff refused.

"Shortly after, cabin crew began selling duty free items and the defendant bought a bottle of Jack Daniels. Passengers are not allowed to drink duty free bottles on a flight and are kept in bags to deter passengers from drinking from it on the flight.

"But it was clear the defendant had ripped a hole in the bag and had been drinking Jack Daniels from the bottle in the bag. The crew saw this and told the defendant they were going to confiscate the Jack Daniels and return it to him when the plane had landed. The defendant became agitated and some passengers intervened.

(Image: Liam Preston/ Cavendish Press)

"He told the cabin members: "I will smash your face in and I will kill you right now". The defendant then kissed his muscles on his arms as a demonstration of his strength. When the plane landed in Manchester, the seatbelt signs became illuminated and the defendant was told to stay in his seat.

"But as the plane was taxi-ing the defendant was walking around the plane and began flailing his arms around, to the point he had to be restrained by passengers and crew. A member of the security staff was waiting and when the plane came to a halt, he boarded the plane and saw the defendant was lying on the floor.

"He asked the defendant if he was OK and the defendant said: "f*ck off, who do you think you are, don't you think you know I can smash you all over your face." The defendant struggled to get up from the floor and it was clear that he was being abusive and obnoxious.

"He appeared to punch the man, but then kissed him on the cheek and hugged him. He then head butted him in the face. The defendant then spat at him and some of the spittle went into his mouth.

"The security staff member then grabbed the defendant and forced him to his feet. The police shortly boarded the plane and the defendant was arrested. He was shocked and disgusted by the defendants behaviour and said being spat at was particularly unpleasant.

"Cabin crew said the defendants behaviour caused distress to them and to other passengers. They added that the defendant had used the toilet and left it in an unpleasant state which caused further distress to other passengers."

In mitigation for Preston, defence lawyer David Farley said: "His life was something of a mess at this time. The month before, his wife left him and he had taken up employment in the region of Jakarta in order to start again and get away and start a new life.

"But he had lost his passport between the connecting flight and his employer was unhappy with this, so terminated the contract and his VISA, leaving him having to get out of Jakarta. He had no money.

"He couldn't get home from Jakarta Airport due to limited funds, so his ex wife paid for a cheap flight home which took him 24 hours. He was going by Bangkok and Mumbai. It was an hour and a half before landing at around 6am. He had not eaten for the last few days and the four beers he had, had a distinct effect on him. He felt his life was over. He had no job, no money and his wife had left him."

Mr Farley said his client remembered nothing of the incident and added: "He is not the person to make an example out of, he is very fragile. He knows how serious this matter is.

"I am encouraged to believe it won't happen again. He doesn't ask for sympathy for his problems, he wasn't in control of himself. He has faced up to the fact his marriage won't be rekindled. He is supported at this time from someone who cared about him."

But sentencing Judge Bernard Lever told Preston: "You were thoroughly obnoxious and making a nuisance of yourself. The courts do have duty to deter those who give concern and anxiety to other people on a flight.

" I can see the real evidence on your face that you have dealt with significant problems but I consider that your prolonged and serious behaviour can only have an impact on the message to the public at large - and this sort of behaviour won't be tolerated."
