‘Attack bid’: Car traced, but not occupants, says MLA

Ludhiana: A day after AAP MLA from Jagraon Saravjit Kaur Manuke was allegedly followed by four car-borne persons, who even tried to attack her near a toll plaza at Gureh village, the legislator claimed that cops have traced the car owner based on the photographs that she had clicked.

Manuke, who is also the deputy leader of opposition in Vidhan Sabha, on Saturday said, “I had taken pictures of the car that was following my vehicle. I shared the pictures with the police, based on which they traced the owner of the car. However, it is still not clear who were the people inside it. Police said the car belongs to the uncle of one of the youths in the car.”

“The incident comes on the heels of my phone being tapped for which I had given a complaint to the assembly speaker… We only want to know the truth behind it. If it was some hooligans and they apologise, I would ignore the matter. But there might be more to it, that’s my concern. That day, I was coming back from a television debate.”

AAP MLA said on Friday night, she was going towards Jagraon and had crossed Dakha when an SUV with four occupants started to block her vehicle’s way. Though her security personnel warned them not to do so, they continued driving the vehicle in a zig zag manner and pulled the brakes in front of her vehicle.

Manuke claimed that her security personnel came out of the vehicle and questioned their act. But the youths started to talk to him loudly. She said she saved her life by taking her vehicle into the police station at Chaukiman. Later, the youths sped away.

Jagraon DSP Gurdeep Singh said once the MLA gets her statement records, they would identify the persons travelling in the vehicle.

AAP demands probe into ‘attack’

Chandigarh: With AAP’s Jagraon MLA Saravjit Kaur Manuke alleging that some persons followed her in a vehicle in a possible bid to attack her, her party leadership on Saturday demanded a time-bound judicial probe into the incident.

Leader of opposition (LoP) Harpal Singh Cheema said the attackers should be arrested sooner than later. Cheema accused the police of laidback attitude, alleging that the culprits had not been arrested so far even as the legislator had provided the police the leads.

The LoP further said the law and order situation in the state had virtually collapsed and that the criminals and anti-social elements were roaming free without any fear. Drug traffickers and mafia lords in the state were at the helm making lives of the common people a virtual hell while the Captain government remained a mute spectator.

The AAP MLA had alleged that the car (of the accused) was being driven rashly on the highway and she was saved by taking her vehicle into the police station at Chaukiman. She alleged that there were four-five people in the car that was following them. Manuke was accompanied by her husband.



Facebook Twitter Linkedin EMail
