It’s NH-8 again: 2 die in car-bike collision

Gurgaon: At least two persons died and three were critically injured when a car ploughed into a bike near Narsinghpur on NH-8, a highway that has seen around 150 fatal crashes in the past three years.The accident occurred on a day chief minister Manohar Lal Khattar was visiting the city and traffic cops were stationed at various junctions to monitor the movement of vehicles. A few hours earlier, two cars collided on the Delhi-Jaipur Expressway near Shankar Chowk. There were no casualties in this accident.Police said the Narsinghpur accident occurred when the bike going ahead of the car changed the lane suddenly and took the driver of the car by surprise.The car driver tried to steer the vehicle to the right, but failed to brake on time. The car rammed the bike, which skidded on the highway, crashed into the divider and turned turtle.The biker died on the spot and the car was mangled. One of the four occupants of the car succumbed to injuries while being taken to hospital.“The biker died on the spot from the impact of the crash. One of the persons inside the car also died on the way to hospital and three others were injured,” said a homeguard who was witness to the accident.The officer investigating the Narsinghpur accident could not be reached for a comment despite repeated attempts.During his visit to the city on Saturday, the chief minister had used the same highway on which the Narsinghpur accident took place. However, both Khattar and his deputy, Dushyant Chautala, sought to skirt a question on why fatal accidents were rising on the stretch and what the government was planning to do in this regard. While Chautala claimed he would need to study reports before making any comment, Khattar met the question with a smile and silence.NH-8 has often attracted attention for the number of accidents on the stretch. According to the road safety data dashboard launched by Union road transport and highways minister Nitin Gadkari, the highway tops the list of 10 roads that have been identified as unsafe.These findings are based on audits conducted by the Central Road Research Institute (CRRI).The Narsinghpur area, in particular, has time and again been earmarked as a black spot. Several audits have expressed concern over design flaws, which make the area prone to accidents. As the road cuts through the village, residents are often seen crossing the speedway on foot, throwing caution to the wind.Urban transport experts have noted that drastic change in land use pattern around the highways has resulted in congestions, and subsequent accidents.“Practically, this carriageway is now used as a normal city road with urban traffic merging with the highway traffic. Now, due to difference of speed, it creates conflict points at several spots, leading to accidents. Yet it is treated as highway,” said transport expert Sewa Ram.
