Opposition corners UP CM Yogi Adityanath over Unnao rape-murder incident

The Opposition parties on Saturday strongly criticised the Yogi Adityanath-led government in Uttar Pradesh after the death of the Unnao rape victim at Safdarjung hospital in Delhi on Friday night.

Congress general secretary Priyanka Gandhi Vadra who visited the victim's family on Saturday lashed out at the BJP government in the state and said that the accused were "shielded" by the Yogi Government.

"I have heard that the accused have links with the BJP. This is why they were being shielded by this government. Criminals have no fear of law. The victim and her family were constantly being harassed since last year but the police failed to provide any help. The Congress party will continue to fight until justice is served," Priyanka Gandhi Vadra said.

"90 incidents of rape have taken place in Unnao from January till now. The Chief Minister should set up a dedicated helpline to deal with complaints of crime against women at his office," she had earlier said.

The Congress workers also protested and raised slogans against state cabinet ministers Swami Prasad Maurya, Kamla Rani Varun and BJP MP from Unnao Sakshi Maharaj when they reached the village to meet the victim's family.



Congress leaders and workers also protested outside the state BJP headquarters in Lucknow and other districts against the UP government.



Earlier, Samajwadi Party chief Akhilesh Yadav sat on a dharna outside the UP assembly to protest against the Unnao case. Terming the day as "Black Day", Akhilesh Yadav demanded the BJP government in the state be removed.

"This is a 'Black Day' for the country. This government is giving sorrow and creating difficulties. The state government which cannot ensure security to women should be removed. We will fight for the rights of the people," Akhilesh Yadav said.

Akhilesh Yadav also said that his party workers will organise "condolence meetings in every district headquarter in the memory of all those daughters who have lost their lives in such heinous crimes".

"We all remember another incident in Unnao when a girl who was raped by BJP MLA Kuldeep Sengar tried to immolate herself outside CM's residence for justice. Her father was brutally killed and she lost her other family members. Now, another horrific crime has taken place in Unnao. BJP is responsible for both the incidents," Akhilesh Yadav said.

Bahujan Samaj Party (BSP) supremo Mayawati also met UP governor Anandiben Patel at Raj Bhawan in Lucknow and expressed concerns over the deteriorating law and order situation.

"Almost everyday heinous cases of crime against women are being reported in the state. Women are very unsafe under BJP rule. The governor of the state is a woman and she can understand the problems women are facing. She should use her constitutional powers and take time-bound action so that such heinous crimes can be controlled," Mayawati said in a statement.

Mayawati also urged the central government to enact a law for capital punishment of the accused.



"I am deeply saddened by the death of Unnao rape victim who was set ablaze. The central government should enact a law so that capital punishment could be given to the rape accused in a limited time. It is important to instill fear in the minds of people who commit such heinous crimes," Mayawati posted on Twitter.

Meanwhile, UP cabinet minister Swami Prasad Maurya said such incidents "should not be politicised" and the culprits of the Unnao rape victim will not spared.

"Such incidents should not be politicised. All the five accused were arrested and sent to jail immediately after the horrific crime took place. Culprits will not be spared and this case will be fast-tracked. Our government will provide compensation of Rs 25 lakh to the bereaved family and a house," Swami Prasad Maurya said.
