Hundreds gather at Jantar Mantar against Citizenship Amendment Bill

Help India!

By NewsDesk, TwoCircles.net

Hundreds of students, activists and citizens gathered in Jantar Mantar on Dec 7 under the banner of United Against Hate (UAH) to oppose the National Register of Citizens (NRC) and the Citizenship Amendment Bill (CAB).

Support TwoCircles



Nadeem Khan from UAH said that “irrespective of the opposition parties, the citizens of this country will completely boycott NRC and CAB. We will do a Civil Disobedience against this. We shall also question and surround the opposition parties who will betray us”. Yogendra Yadav, from Swaraj India Abhiyan, said that “CAB sabotages the fundamental secular character of India. Yes, Indian secularism has many limitations but CAB tends to destroy it completely. The CAB does not talk about persecuted minorities from non-muslim nations. It does not talk about Muslim minorities from a Muslim nation. It is highly discriminatory”.

Umar Khalid from UAH said “this is a renewed attempt to implement Savarkar’s Two Nations Theory. NRC and CAB have to be completely boycotted in order to safeguard our democracy”.

Javed Ali, MP of Congress from Kishanganj, “The BJP-led government is being brazenly majoritarian. They are also Muslim haters and they don’t try to hide it anymore. We have been elected in the parliament to safeguard the constitution and we will fight it back. He also challenged Bihar CM Nitish Kumar to take a stand against CAB and prove his secular credentials.”

Satish Ch Yadav, General Secretary JNUSU said the students of this country will fight against the attempts to communally polarise this country.

N.Sai Balaji, All India President of All India Students Association (AISA) said “CAB/NRC is a dream of Golwalkar and Savarkar. Leaders like Sardar Patel had rejected this poisonous ideology. The people all over the country are fighting for jobs, economy, women’s safety and for the constitution against the Sangh Parivar. NRC and CAB is anti-people, anti-tribals, anti-Dalits and anti-minority and we will fight tooth and nail against it”.
