Citizenship Amendment Bill: Shiv Sena suggests no voting rights for new citizens for 25 years

Clearing its stand on the Citizenship (Amendment) Bill -- CAB -- the Shiv Sena on Monday questioned whether the intention of the bill was to "create a vote bank" and said it is not good for the country.

"Is it acceptable?" Sena questioned in its editorial mouthpiece Saamana.

While it did not directly oppose the bill, it suggested Union Home Minister Amit Shah to revoke voting rights of new citizens for the next 25 years.

Sena's suggestion came just before Amit Shah presents the bill in Lok Sabha on Monday. Sena also questioned the move as it fears that "selective acceptance" of Hindu illegal immigrants will act as a trigger for a religious war in the country.

It also warned the Centre that the bill could lead to an "invisible partition" of Hindus and Muslims.

The Uddhav Thackeray-led party said that the bill could encourage "vote bank politics" which is against the best interest of the country.

Sena also questioned the timing of the bill and said there are several problems India faces at the moment and added that CAB would just turn out to be another controversial move.

"There is no dearth of problems in India now but still we are inviting new ones such as CAB. It looks like the Centre has made an invisible partition of Hindus and Muslims over the bill," Sena said.

The Sena editorial also highlighted that most of the states from the North East region have opposed the CAB along with Bihar and West Bengal.

Sena also appealed Prime Minister Narendra Modi to instead initiate action against some neighbouring countries that torture Hindus, just like he had acted against Pakistan.

"It is true that there is no other country for Hindus except Hindustan. But by accepting only Hindus among the illegal immigrants...will it be a trigger of a religious war in the country?" the Sena asked.

"If someone is trying to do a vote bank politics under the garb of the Citizenship (Amendment) Bill then it is not in the interest of the country," it added.
