Pune residents shun onions in home kitchens, believe this will bring costs down once again

onions

Pune residents shun onions in home kitchens 00:52

(Above) While the Dukales are replacing onion in dishes with ingredients like potato, peas, and other aromats, the Zavars (below) claim their taste buds have adjusted to the absence now

Kothrud

potato

PIC: MAHENDRA KOLHE

Mandai

With the skyrocketing cost ofbringing tears to people’s eyes across the country, instead of cutting into the bulb itself doing so, some ‘practical’ alterations are becoming visible in kitchens of homes in Pune, too.It has been observed that a number of families and individuals in the city are boycotting the now-ridiculously expensive (but usually indispensable) ingredient. In fact, a movement has slowly been initiated on these lines by several citizens, circulating messages on social networks and appealing to all to shun the onion for just a month — all in the belief that this will bring the prices back to normal.The practice is alike to a modern tradition in the Japanese culture, wherein the non-consumption or minimal consumption of any item that has witnessed an unprecedented price hike is followed collectively by consumers.Those championing the cause here believe this act will lead to a fall in costs of onions over a month or so, as well as bring about a demoralising effect on hoarders of stocks.Speaking to Mirror about the same,resident and teacher Sharvari Dukale shared, “Our family thought we shouldn’t make ourselves dependent on commodities that are expensive — those that may now seem like a luxury to a poor person. We believe in simple living, and after reading messages about this practice in Japan, we thought we should give it a try by discontinuing the use of onion for a few days in our meals. I cook mostly at home, so I am now coming up with ways to make food tasty without this pricey component. I use morein pohe, peas in upma and other aromatic flavours in curries.”The Dukales have vowed not to buy onions till the rates drop back to normal like earlier times, when they were sold at Rs 25-30 per kg. Many like them were also clear that there are no political motivations in this humble attempt to protest the price hike from their own kitchens. Sharvari’s husband, engineer Narendra Dukale, insisted, “This has nothing to do against or for the government. We are simply doing it on a family level as we felt like it.”Similarly, another couple residing in Balewadi, the Zawars, are practising this boycott for roughly a week now. According to Kavish Zawar, he feels avoiding the onion has not made a huge different to his life. “My wife and I were talking casually about the price hike — it started off as a joke that we stop buying things that become exorbitantly costly. For the past few weeks, we have been hearing many versions from vendors about why onions have become so expensive. We thought that in this light, we might as well not consume this product for a few days. We don’t want to blame any political party or complain. We just want to do this on an individual level. Every week, while stocking up on groceries, we will just skip buying onions. I don’t think it hurts our taste buds anymore,” he claimed.Onions are at present being sold for close to Rs 160-200 per kg in the city, depending on area. Atand Market Yard, the city’s two most famous vegetable markets, the lowest price being shelled out for a kilo of the bulb is Rs 140, and after a lot of bargaining.But the united suffering seems to also be sparking random acts of community kindness. Kothrud resident Vidusha Ghatpande, who has a business of organic vegetables and fruits, has extended a generous offer to those around her — she has two jute bags full of onions that she had earlier stocked for her personal kitchen use, but has now distributed amongst family and friends. “I am a food-enthusiast and love sharing the dishes that I make. I know the importance of onion as a food item — at least I cannot do without it in what I eat! Everywhere I go, I hear about the scarcity and how my own people aren’t eating well without this ingredient. So, I am giving away most of onions I have,” she said, adding, “Rates will go down eventually — but I feel sometimes, the need of the moment should be addressed first.”
