JNU protest updates: Students detained after clash with police

JNU students have shared pictures on social media showing heightened security outside the university campus. (Photo: Twitter/JNUSU)

Security outside Jawaharlal Nehru University (JNU) was tightened on Monday ahead of a planned students' march to Rashtrapati Bhavan to protest against the hostel fee hike. According to reports, students from the university circulated photos and claimed that police closed all the gates of JNU.

The traffic police department also confirmed that all the roads leading to JNU have been closed for incoming traffic. Delhi Traffic Police also told news agency PTI that Baba Ganganath Marg is closed for vehicular traffic due to students' protest and the long march.

Follow LIVE Updates:

6:15 PM: Protesting JNU students have been detained after a clash with police

6:15 PM: Entry & exit gates at all stations have been opened. Normal services have resumed in all stations.

4:30 PM: Police resorted to lathicharge after a clash with protesting Jawaharlal Nehru University (JNU) students, who were marching towards Rashtrapati Bhawan to meet President over fee hike issue.

#WATCH: Police resorted to lathicharge after a clash with protesting Jawaharlal Nehru University (JNU) students, who were marching towards Rashtrapati Bhawan to meet President over fee hike issue. pic.twitter.com/sAbuN05n2q ANI (@ANI) December 9, 2019

14:46 PM: JNU students have started marching towards Rashtrapati Bhavan despite police allowing the march till Sarojini Nagar bus depot. Here are some pictures:

Delhi: Jawaharlal Nehru University (JNU) students march from JNU campus to Rashtrapati Bhawan seeking to meet President over fee hike issue. pic.twitter.com/BV98gWA8EL ANI (@ANI) December 9, 2019

14:19 PM: Students have been allowed to march till Sarojini Nagar bus depot as police have removed their barricades blocking the JNU gates. However, the students will not be allowed to march beyond the bus depot.

13:05 PM: In view of the protests over JNU students and Citizenship (Amendment Bill), Delhi Metro has temporarily closed entry and exit at Udhogbhavan metro station, Lok Kalyan Marg metro station and Central Secretariat metro station. The order for temporary closing the metro gates was taken by Delhi Police.

"As advised by Delhi Police, trains are not halting at Udyog Bhawan and Lok Kalyan Marg metro stations," DMRC told news agency PTI.

12:40 PM: JNUSU said its march would be started by 12:30 pm. JNU students seem to be undeterred by heightened security outside the campus.

12:30 PM: JNUSU says students of the university have been waiting for the "VC-in exile" to participate in dialogue and added that they will not "wait forever". "We refuse to wait forever. The Visitor of JNU must intervene to restore normalcy. This administration has to go," JNUSU said.

11:55 AM: Continuing its attack on the administration and government, JNUSU sad the entire country is looking up to them and added that the fight will not stop.

"This is about saving the soul of JNU, and that of India. Unilateral decision making is illegal in a Constitutional Democracy. No decision without representation. We march on," it added.

11:50 AM: On its official Twitter handle, the Jawaharlal Nehru Students' Union (JNUSU) asked why police are so afraid of them.

"Why is the Police so afraid of us? Why do those in power not want us to exercise our Constitution given right to protest peacefully? We will fight," JNUSU tweeted.

Why is the Police so afraid of us? Why do those in power not want us to exercise our Constitution given right to protest peacefully? We will fight till the end to #SavePublicEducation #FeesMustFall#ChatraPadayatra #emergencyinjnu pic.twitter.com/qJYaUp01Ir JNUSU (@JNUSUofficial) December 9, 2019

11:43 AM: JNUSU has posted pictures on its Twitter handle showing how security has been tightened by Delhi Police outside the university campus.

All gates in and around JNU have been shut down by the Delhi Police. Huge numbers of barricades and police personnel.

Creating an emergency environment to try and stop the padyatra to Rashtrapati Bhavan.#FeesMustFall #EmergencyinJNU pic.twitter.com/7UT9GIivKP JNUSU (@JNUSUofficial) December 9, 2019

11:40 AM: Police have tightened security outside JNU campus ahead of a planned march by students to Rashtrapati Bhavan. The agitating students continue to demand administration to rollback any hike in service and utility charges for hostels.

Apart from the long march to the Rashtrapati Bhavan, agitating students have also threatened to boycott final exams scheduled on December 12.

The issue has already been taken up in the Parliament and reports suggest that the government is looking to break the deadlock by announcing a rollback of hiked service and utility charges for hostels and also withdrawal of cases registered against students during the first wave of protests related to hostel fee hike.
