Red Warnings in North India as Intense Western Disturbance Approaches

File photo of rains in Delhi (UMESH KUMAR / BCCL, Delhi)

One of the most intense Western Disturbance (WD) of this season so far is set to affect north India this week, foreshadowing the start of the winter season in the region. The low-pressure system is likely to bring widespread rain and snow across the western Himalayan region and scattered thunderstorms over northern plains, including Delhi.

Western Himalayan region, which includes Jammu and Kashmir, Ladakh, Himachal Pradesh and Uttarakhand, is likely to witness the maximum intensity of rain and snow on Thursday and Friday, as per the India Meteorological Department (IMD) forecast.

Moderate, fairly widespread rainfall is possible over Punjab, Haryana, Chandigarh & Delhi, West Uttar Pradesh, north Rajasthan and north Madhya Pradesh on Thursday and Friday. Thunderstorms, lightning and hailstorms are also likely at isolated places from Wednesday onwards.

Snowfall accumulation over north India Between Wednesday and Friday (TWC Met Team)

The regional met centre has issued a red warning—highest level alert to 'take action'—for Jammu and Kashmir, Ladakh, Himachal Pradesh and Uttarakhand for Thursday and Friday. Moreover, Punjab is under orange level alert to 'be prepared', while Haryana, Delhi and western UP are under yellow watch to 'be updated' on Thursday and Friday. Isolated heavy rainfall is forecast over north Punjab on Thursday and Friday and over north Haryana and northwest Uttar Pradesh on Friday.

The WD is currently lying over eastern parts of Iran and is likely to start affecting north Indian region from Tuesday onwards. IMD reports that a cyclonic circulation is expected to form over southwest Rajasthan under the influence of the incoming WD on Wednesday night. As the circulation moves east-northeastwards, the snow and rainfall are likely to intensify.

Advertisement On Friday and Saturday, the circulation is likely to bring scattered to fairly widespread rainfall over eastern UP and Bihar. The impact of the WD is expected to peak on Friday with possibilities of snow accumulation of over 50 cm at isolated places across north India.

Rain and snow accumulation over north India Between Wednesday and Friday (TWC Met Team)

The cyclonic circulation induced by the WD will bring moderate to heavy rain and thunderstorms over Delhi-NCR region along with strong winds from Thursday onwards. Air quality is likely to improve around Delhi-NCR under the influence of the WD and induced circulation.

A WD originates as a low-pressure system over the Mediterranean Sea. High-altitude westerly winds push these systems towards India. On its way, the disturbance gathers moisture from various sources including Mediterranean, Caspian and sometimes even the Arabian Sea.

The influence of WDs is maximum over north India during the winter season from December to February and provide an estimated 5-10% of India's annual rainfall. The Leh cloud-burst of 2010 and Uttarakhand floods of 2013 serve as tragic reminders of the potential of these systems, and the importance of forewarning.

**

For weather & air quality updates on the go, download The Weather Channel App (on Android and iOS store). It's free!
