Almost 1,000 scholars from across the globe write to govt to withdraw Citizenship (Amendment) Bill

AIUDF opposes CAB bill | Photo Credit: PTI

Key Highlights 964 scholars from across the globe have demanded the Indian government to withdraw the CAB, 2019 The signatories of the letter say CAB, 2019, discriminates on the basis of religion, dubbing it unconstitutional Signatories of the letter, some of whom hail from Harvard, IITs and JNU, wrote that Article 14 prohibits the govt from to deny any individual equality before the law

New Delhi: As the debate in Lok Sabha continues over the contentious Citizenship (Amendment) Bill, 2019, as many as 964 scientists and scholars have written to the government expressing their concerns.

The letter is signed by academicians and scholars from hundreds of national and international educational institutions of global repute. Some of these institutes include Harvard University, JNU, University of Chicago, IIT Kanpur, Central Michigan University, IIT Hyderabad, The City College of New York, IIT Madras, Centre for Peace Studies, Tata Institute of Social Sciences, Mumbai.

The signatories said that the CAB uses religion as a legal criterion for determining Indian citizenship, which they described as deeply troubling. The signatories mentioned that their statement, in a personal capacity, was based on media reports, as they did not have access to the exact text of the bill.

The letter said, “We fear, in particular, that the careful exclusion of Muslims from the ambit of the bill will greatly strain the pluralistic fabric of the country”.

The scholars demanded an immediate withdrawal of the bill stating that Article 14 of the Constitution prohibits the government to deny any person equality before the law.

“The use of religion as a criterion for citizenship in the proposed bill would mark a radical break with this history and would be inconsistent with the basic structure of the constitution,” says the letter.

Here is the full text of the letter

We are a group of Indian scientists and scholars.

We are issuing this statement in our personal capacity as concerned citizens to express our dismay at the reported plans to table the Citizenship Amendment Bill 2019 in the parliament. We do not have access to the exact text of the current version of the Bill. Our statement is based on media reports and the text of the previous version of the Bill that was passed by the Lok Sabha in January 2019. Nevertheless, we feel compelled to issue this statement already at this point of time in view of the reports that the Bill may be tabled in parliament early next week and may be taken up for voting in both houses soon after.

We understand that the Bill seeks to grant citizenship to Hindus, Sikhs, Buddhists, Jains, Parsis and Christians from Afghanistan, Bangladesh and Pakistan. The stated intent of the Bill is to provide refuge to persecuted minorities from neighbouring countries. While we support this laudable objective, we find it deeply troubling that the Bill uses religion as a legal criterion for determining Indian citizenship.

The idea of India that emerged from the independence movement, and as enshrined in our constitution, is that of a country that aspires to treat people of all faiths equally. The use of religion as a criterion for citizenship in the proposed bill would mark a radical break with this history and would be inconsistent with the basic structure of the constitution. We fear, in particular, that the careful exclusion of Muslims from the ambit of the Bill will greatly strain the pluralistic fabric of the country.

We note that article 14 of the Indian constitution prohibits the State from denying “to any person equality before the law or the equal protection of the laws within the territory of India.” While it is the job of legal experts to determine whether this draft bill violates the letter of the constitution, it seems certain to us that it violates its spirit.

For the reasons mentioned above, we call for the immediate withdrawal of this bill and as its replacement request for appropriate legislation that will address the concerns of refugees and minorities in a non-discriminatory manner.


