Anna Hazare to undertake “maun-vrat” from December 20 to demand justice for Nirbhaya; writes to PM

Anna Hazare, social activist | Photo Credit: PTI

Key Highlights Anna Hazare wrote a letter to Prime Minister Narendra Modi demanding speedier delivery of justice to Nirbhaya and warned the PM that he would undertake a vow of silence from December 20 Hazare said that the people have lost faith in the justice delivery system and therefore many have praised the recent encounter conducted by the Hyderabad police He asserted that if the government doesn’t take steps to ensure that the Nirbhaya case culprits are punished quickly, he will undertake an indefinite hunger strike

New Delhi: Social activist Anna Hazare, on Monday, penned down a letter to the Prime Minister Narendra Modi expressing shock over the current string of incidents of rape and murders being committed against the women in the country. He warned the central government of undertaking “maun-vrat” (vow of silence) from 20 December for Nirbhaya (name changed) who was gang-raped in Delhi in December 2012.

Nirbhaya's case had made the world sit up as hundreds of marches and protests in support of the paramedical student, rocked the nation. The hapless girl had been raped by six men (one of them a juvenile) inside a bus for hours and died in hospital after a few days. Four of the convicts were awarded a death penalty (as one committed suicide and the juvenile escaped trial). Anna Hazare has now urged the Prime Minister to deliver speedy justice to the victim by carrying out the sentence handed out by the Supreme Court. If the government doesn’t speed up action in the long-drawn-out case, then the veteran activist warns that he will start an indefinite hunger strike.

Referring to the incident of Hyderabad encounter by police where four men had been accused of raping and killing a 23-year-old veterinarian, Hazare expressed alarm over the fact that many people have praised the police encounter. "This indicates that people have lost faith in the judicial system due to its delay in delivering justice,” he wrote.

Anna has highlighted that the last convict who was hanged on rape charges by the orders of the Indian Supreme Court was Dhananjay Chatterjee on 2004 and that though several heinous rapes and murders have taken place later, none have seen a speedy delivery of punishment. “After that, a total of 426 convicts have been awarded the capital punishment for rape and murder but none of them has been executed”, he added.

Recalling his own experiences with the judicial system he said that in 1988 when he levelled allegations of corruption against then-Maharashtra government minister Babanrao Gholap, backed by strong evidence, the minister retaliated by filing a case against Hazare. "The court sentenced me to three months of imprisonment and I was released only after fourteen days. Later in 2014 the minister got convicted for allegations and was sentenced to seven years of imprisonment”, said the veteran social activist.

Expressing his concern over women's safety in the country, he wrote, “The rising incidents of crimes against women are worrisome. The public outrage after the Nirbhaya incident led to amendment and enactment of laws. But we have failed to deliver justice to Nirbhaya as the convicts are yet to face the gallows. Meanwhile, there are over six lakh rape cases pending in the fast-track courts.”

Slamming the government for its measures undertaken to ensure women's safety, Anna Hazare said that the 1091helpline meant for women doesn’t function properly. “The government cannot bring about a change in people’s mindset and the executive's functioning by simply spending money. The Nirbhaya fund is a clear example as it hasn’t been utilised by the state’s machinery”, stressed the social activist.

“Women face difficulty at the primary level of registering an FIR for heinous atrocities committed against them, this clearly reflects the lack of sensitivity and will to act” wrote Hazare.

Anna hazare said that the delay in delivery of justice is also a form of injustice. Further, he said that people are losing faith and trust in judiciary’s competence and have begun to doubt whether it can perform its role. He highlighted that people also feel that the executive is failing them in implementing the laws and that this is dangerous for a vibrant democracy like India.
