Storms in the Chai Cup

By Nilanjan Mukhopadhyay

In the ivory high-rise we live in, political activity is restricted to resident welfare associations (RWAs), and interactions with RSS swayamsevaks who come calling during elections to preach the virtues of voting, and how this strengthens the nation. Which is why it was surprising to hear slogans last week like ‘We want justice’ and ‘Azadi!’ from a lively bunch as they marched down the ‘road below’.

The protest was perplexing — especially considering Jawaharlal Nehru University (JNU) does not have a satellite campus. In recent years, public activism has become a strict no-no in most residential colonies, typifying urban India’s middle-class cocoons. Since most residents equate any form of protest with ‘anti-nationalism’, however, why did the rape and murder of the young veterinarian in Hyderabad incense people so much that they came out on the streets in protest — and later, to publicly rejoice the reported ‘encounter’ killings of the perpetrators?

Were these one-off demonstrations organised by conscientious citizens? Or were they indicative of subtle shift in people’s attitude to State power and the broadening of their concerns? Theorising on the basis of ‘anecdotal evidence’ is fraught with dangers. But there is certainly a need to examine the extent to which such protests can be linked to BJP’s recent political setbacks.

Arguably, below-par performance in Maharashtra, and being forced to accept a coalition partner primarily representing Jats in Haryana, indicates the political tide turning somewhat against the party. The subsequent political adventurism in Maharashtra, too, embarrassingly backfired.

These developments will influence Jharkhand’s ongoing polls, and will likely to also have a bearing on BJP’s fortunes in Delhi polls in February. It does not help that economic news everywhere has ‘distress’ as a common headline.

Although GoI has taken several measures to boost the economy, the old cheer is missing. Coming barely six months after registering a superlative electoral tally, and also keeping the nationalistic narrative up and running by suspending Article 370 on J&K and having the Ayodhya verdict ‘go its way’, there are sufficient reasons for BJP to worry.

This, however, is not the first time BJP is confronted with a challenge while in office at the Centre. In 2015, when still politically ascendant, the party suffered humiliating defeats in Delhi and Bihar.

These losses coincided with sections of the intelligentsia rediscovering their voice and protesting against alleged ‘minority profiling’ and targeted attacks. Yet, BJP steadied its ship, pursued policies of its choice, secured greater ideological support, and won state elections.

The party again went through a slump from the autumn of 2017. The ‘barely respectable’ performance in Gujarat, followed by several defeats in bypolls, and being voted out of power in Madhya Pradesh, Rajasthan and Chhattisgarh, boxed BJP in an unenviable position.

When asked about the party’s ‘nightmare situation’, a senior party leader responded by saying that Lok Sabha polls were being reduced to an ‘aggregate of 543 elections’. Opinion polls suggested India was, indeed, moving towards that scenario, as economic woes mounted and people began to look at their bottom line, rather than towards matters of national ‘pride’ and security.

Eventually, the terrorist strike in Pulwama in February 2019, GoI’s retaliation in Balakot, and the swift return of captured Indian Air Force pilot Abhinandan Varthaman enabled Modi to personally script a high-decibel campaign based on national security and pride. It bore dividends, the extent of which few anticipated. Sensing an ideological tilt in its favour, BJP pressed on core items in its Hindutva agenda.

By the time elections were called in Maharashtra and Haryana, most Indians had turned fatalistic. The PM downward, many prominent BJP leaders cited decisions on Kashmir and the criminalisation of instant triple talaq, among other issues, to showcase the party’s commitment to a certain form of nationalism.

Yet, as bypolls in West Bengal also revealed, there are limits to ideology driving state elections, not to mention support to some of BJP’s ideological pursuits.

Witness, for instance, state leaders asserting that Trinamool Congress gains in all three seats were due to the National Register of Citizens (NRC) going on an overdrive. Furthermore, voters in Maharashtra and Haryana were guided more by local concerns and less by national ‘achievements’ that BJP had listed.

Prior to polling in the two western states, many concluded that BJP merely needed to spin one ‘Hindutva narrative’ after another to keep winning elections. Recent developments, however, require BJP to assess if the law of diminishing returns applies to ideological accomplishments, too. Additionally, if after ‘settling’ matters pertaining to inter-community relations, are people beginning to be guided more by livelihood and other concerns? Does Shiv Sena remaining devoted to Hindutva — as chief minister Uddhav Thackeray announced after breaking with BJP and forming government in Maharashtra — neutralise Modi’s advantage?

Do the street protests mirror an emerging reality? There are no immediate answers. But recent developments will force soul-searching in every party, including BJP.

Facebook Twitter Linkedin Email Disclaimer Views expressed above are the author's own.

END OF ARTICLE
