G V L Narasimha Rao seeks criminal case against MLC Buddha Venkanna

Vijayawada: BJP Rajya Sabha member G V L Narasimha Rao in a letter urged the Union government to take action against the TDP leaders who have been threatening him and also sought protection in Delhi and outside in view of their threats.

In his letter written to Union home minister Rajnath Singh on Wednesday, Narasimha Rao alleged that the TDP cadres have been threatening the BJP leaders vitiating the political climate.

He accused the ruling party leaders in the state, including Chief Minister N Chandrababu Naidu, have been promoting culture of violence and hatred against opposition parties.

Citing the latest example, the MP said that TDP spokesperson and MLC Buddha Venkanna, who he alleged the main accused in so-called call money sex racket, had threatened him in a statement in the media with physical assaults.

Narasimha Rao said there was a long list of TDP leaders who have been targeting him and threatening him with dire consequences. In addition to the leaders, many TDP supporters have been issuing threats to him on a regular basis in social media.

He regretted that lack of action in such cases coupled with overt and blatant support of the Chief Minister emboldened rowdy elements in TDP to indulge in such criminal behaviour. With the elections round the corner, such criminal behaviour on the part of the ruling party would vitiate the political atmosphere in the state, he averred.

The BJP MP appealed to the Union home minister to treat this letter as complaint and instruct the state director general of police, exercising the special powers of the Central government, to register a case against MLC Buddha Venkanna for issuing physical threats to him. He also suggested that alternatively, based on this complaint letter, Delhi police may register a case and hand the case over to the CBI for investigation.

He appealed to the home minister to initiate appropriate action against such unscrupulous individuals and offer suitable protection to him in Delhi and outside.


