Dawn To Dusk Bandh Paralyses Northeast After Controversial Citizenship Bill Gets Lok Sabha Nod

Following heated debates, arguments and counter-arguments that lasted for over seven hours, the controversial Citizenship (Amendment) Bill, which seeks to provide Indian citizenship to non-Muslim refugees coming from Pakistan, Bangladesh and Afghanistan after facing religious persecution there, was passed by the Lok Sabha a little past midnight on Monday.



The Bill was passed in the Lok Sabha with 311 members favouring it while 80 members voted against it. It will now be tabled in the Rajya Sabha for its nod. Several amendments brought by opposition members, including one by a Shiv Sena MP, were defeated either by voice vote or division.

Just as the bill sailed through the Lower House of Indian parliament, voices of dissent and protests, which had already gained momentum prior to its introduction in the parliament, found further resonance in the northeastern flank of the country. The region has seen massive protests against the bill introduced by Home Minister Amit Shah.



It has resulted in an 11-hour northeast bandh called by an umbrella body of students' organisations of the region to protest against the Citizenship (Amendment) Bill. News agency PTI reported from Guwahati that the protests began at 5 am on Tuesday morning.



The North East Students' Organisation (NESO), backed by various other bodies and political parties, will observe the shutdown till 4 pm against the Bill which was introduced in the Lok Sabha on Monday.



According to PTI, Security has been beefed up in Assam, Arunachal Pradesh, Meghalaya, Mizoram and Tripura. On the other hand, Nagaland has been exempted from the purview of the bandh in view of the ongoing Hornbill Festival there.



The Manipur People Against CAB (Manpac), which was spearheading the agitation in the state, has announced the suspension of its stir on Monday.

The Citizenship (Amendment) Bill 2019, seeks to grant Indian citizenship to non-Muslim refugees from Pakistan, Bangladesh and Afghanistan if they faced religious persecution there. They will be given Indian citizenship after residing in the country for five years, instead of 11 years which is the current norm.



Indigenous people of the Northeastern states are scared that the entry of these people will endanger their identity and livelihood. Various organisations of the region have launched a series of agitations against the Bill.

Gauhati University and Dibrugarh University in the state have postponed all examinations scheduled for tomorrow, PTI reported. At the same time, the Bill would not be applicable to Arunachal Pradesh, Nagaland and Mizoram where the ILP system exists and those tribal regions of Assam, Meghalaya and Tripura which are governed under the Sixth Schedule of the Constitution.

This is the second region-wise bandh in this issue this year. Several organisations observed a bandh on January 8 when the earlier Citizenship (Amendment) Bill was passed. However, the Bill lapsed as it was not introduced in Rajya Sabha. A new version was tabled on Lok Sabha on Monday.
