Passengers stage protest, threaten to boycott Oman Air

Oman Air

Passengers who booked tickets on discounted fares during the Republic Day weekend for Delhi-Tehran-Delhi flights ofhave threatened to boycott the airline and demanded that passengers should be compensated for their loss.A group of passengers led by Maulana Syed Jalal Naqvi, who is secretary of Majlis-e-Ulama-e-Hind, formed a group, Distressed Passengers of Oman Air, and staged a demonstration outside the Oman Air office in New Delhi on Tuesday afternoon.Naqvi accused the airline of hurting religious sentiments of Shia Muslims, a large number of whom booked the discounted fares offered to visit the holy shrine of Imam Reza, the 8th Imam in Mashad, Iran. “The airline took advantage of our sentiments and booked thousands of tickets at the price of Rs 6700 which was given on its website on January 24, 25, and 26, 2019, and confirmed the price when customers called their customer executives. But, now the airline is excusing its actions by calling it a website error, and asking us to cancel the tickets or else the tickets will be automatically cancelled,” said Naqvi.Naqvi emphasised that those who booked the tickets on discounted fare swish to travel on the fares offered by the airline on those three days, and demanded that the airline give 100 per cent compensation if they are cancelling the tickets. He demanded that the airline should also compensate the money paid by the passengers who booked connecting domestic flights. He also demanded that the Ministry of Civil Aviation take action against the airline for hurting the sentiments of pilgrims.Meanwhile, Vellor-based passenger Rahil Abbas, who booked the Oman Air flight from Delhi to Tehran via Muscat on January 26, has sent a legal notice to the airline demanding that Oman Air honour the contract for his journey. He is scheduled to board the Oman Air flight on February 12, and has also booked the return ticket for February 26 for a price of Rs 6752. He said he received the copy of the e-ticket in his email and was duly confirmed by Oman Air.Abbas contends in the notice that the airline had completed a contract with him by confirming and Oman Air cannot unilaterally breach the contract by calling it off without his consent. Oman Air had put out a circular that till February 4, the airline was ready to offer a special fare of Rs 29,000 instead of Rs 39,000 for the same flight, provided customers like Abbas pay the difference of fare.The notice states that the company’s actions are in violation of the policies of Directorate General of Civil Aviation (DGCA) and violates Civil Aviation Requirements (CAR) under Section 3. The notice said he cannot be made to pay the additional charges after he purchased a valid ticket for no fault of his. “Oman Air is supposed to pay for their own negligence and he cannot be forced to pay for the mistakes of Oman Air,” the notice said.A group of passengers also started an online petition demanding that Oman Air validate their tickets instead of forcing them to cancel the tickets. The petition had garnered 166 signatures in support.Sudhakara Reddy, president of the Air Passengers Association of India (APAI) tweeted, “This is not acceptable. The Airline has to bear the loss for an error committed by the system, not Pax. Cathay Pacific set an example recently,” Cathay Pacific had by mistake offered return fares in the premium cabin from Da Nang in Vietnam to New York which costs $ 16,000 for economy rates of $675 for travel in August 2019, but had gracefully decided to honour the tickets.
