Anti-CAB protests spread across North East India

AGENCIES / WEB DESK

People in different parts of North eastern states of India are protesting against the Citizenship (Amendment) since the day controversial Bill was tabled for passage in the Lok Sabha.

Normal life has been affected due to the dawn to the dusk bandh given by North East Student Organization against Citizenship Amendment Bill.

Educational institutions, business establishment remain closed and vehicles are off the roads due to bandh call. Train movement is also affected as the protesters also blocked rail tracks at a few places.

In Guwahati Members of the AJYCP staged protests at the entrance to the Janata Bhawan for around two hours. The protesters waved black flags and shouted anti-CAB slogans. The youth body, meanwhile, threatened to move the Supreme Court against the Bill.

Unidentified persons last night wrote ‘No CAB’ slogans on the newly painted roadside walls in different parts of the city.

Students of Gauhati University carried out a torchlight rally – named ‘Akou Saraighatoloi’ – from the university premises. Before the rally, a meeting was held in front of the main gate of the institution, in which thousands of protesters including students, teachers, research scholars and employees of the university took part. Students from other educational institutions also attended the meet.

Addressing the gathering, educationists Udayaditya Bharali, Akhil Ranjan Dutta, Bhaskar Bora, poet Pranab Barman, actor Ravi Sarma and others urged the students to be vocal and speak in the interests of the Assamese language and culture. They also urged them to do an in-depth study on the issue so that the movement continues in the right direction.

During the protest, a number of students wrote anti-CAB slogans with their own blood and displayed them on the protest ground. A student also tonsured his head during the protest. Members of right-leaning student organisations also took part in the meet.

Meanwhile, former Chief Minister Tarun Gogoi joined a sit-in-demonstration organised by a section of journalists in front of the Guwahati Press Club. Senior journalists Ajit Kumar Bhuyan, Adip Phukan, Haidar Hussain, etc., also took part in it.

Bandh affects normal life in Meghalaya

In Meghalaya, the on-going 11- hour-long bandh called by North East Student’s Organisation (NESO) in protest against the Citizenship Amendment Bill, 2019 affected the normal life.

Streets of Shillong wore a deserted look as vehicles stayed off the road, shops, schools remained closed even though Government offices were open. Vehicular movements along the national highway has also been affected.

Tripura govt orders all employees to attend offices

In Tripura, state government ordered all employees to attend offices during 52 hour strike called by some parties and organisations beginning from yesterday. In its order, issued yesterday the government also warned that appropriate action will be taken against the erring employees.

Additional to yesterday’s 12 hour strike called by IPFT, the 52 hour bandh call given by some tribal based organisations has hardly affected the normal life till this morning. Attendance in government establishments was found as usual. Police said, due to the bandh normal life has been affected in TTAADC areas only.

However due to the bandh call, NF Railway has cancelled 6 local train services and partial cancellation of 4 long distance trains for today.
