We will not support it: Inside story of Shiv Sena's U-turn on Citizenship Amendment Bill in Rajya Sabha

Shiv Sena MP Sanjay Raut during a debate on CAB in Rajya Sabha/ Rajya Sabha TV | Photo Credit: Times Now

Key Highlights We believe in the Constitution, said Balasaheb Thorat of Congress Shiv Sena has clearly stated that it will not support the bill in the Rajya Sabha

New Delhi: Congress blackmail is believed to be the reason behind Shiv Sena's change of stance in the Rajya Sabha over the Citizenship Amendment Bill (CAB) 2019. According to a Times Now channel report, the Shiv Sena could either stage a walk-out or, if it gives in to the Congress pressure, may vote against the bill in the Upper House of the Parliament.

"We believe in the Constitution. Shiv Sena should also walk the path of the preamble of the Constitution," Maharashtra Congress leader Balasaheb Thorat said on Wednesday, subtly indicating the thought process that has been percolated by the Congress top brass to the Shiv Sena leadership.

In a visibly renewed stance, Shiv Sena leader Sanjay Raut, who also brokered a deal between the Congress, NCP and Shiv Sena in Maharashtra said — "We will not support it. It is against the country. What is the new definition? Why can't we express our views and sentiments in the Parliament or anywhere else? We have some doubts in our mind. If we don't get an answer to those, then we will think about what to do about it. It's been accepted in Lok Sabha. But in Rajya Sabha, the case is different."

In Lok Sabha, the Shiv Sena supported the contentious bill voting in favour of the same. While speaking in Lok Sabha, Shiv Sena leader Vinayak Raut asked why Sri Lankan Tamils were not included in the bill. "How many refugees from these six communities which are mentioned in the Bill are living in India? HM has not answered this, how much will our population increase when they get citizenship? Also, what about Tamils from Sri Lanka?" Rau had said on Monday.

On Tuesday, party chief and Maharashtra CM Uddhav Thackeray said that the party will support the bill in RS only if the questions put forward by it are answered. It may be noted that Shiv Sena, a former ally of the BJP in Maharashtra as well as Centre, has three MPs in Rajya Sabha. If Sena stages a walkout, it may indirectly help the BJP as the absence of Sena MPs will bring down the overall strength of the House.

If the Sena MPs succumb to Congress pressure and vote against the bill, the BJP may have to depend on allies to help boost the count in favour of the bill.




