‘Dark day in the history of India’: Sonia Gandhi slams Modi govt over Citizenship (Amendment) Bill

Congress chief Sonia Gandhi slams CAB | Photo Credit: PTI

New Delhi: Congress interim president Sonia Gandhi on Wednesday slammed the Narendra Modi government over the Citizenship (Amendment) Bill, 2019, which was passed by the Rajya Sabha tonight. The Lok Sabha has already passed the bill, which will now be sent to the President for his assent.

Gandhi described the day as a "dark day" for India. She called it a victory of narrow-minded and bigoted forces.

"Today marks a dark day in the constitutional history of India. The passage of the Citizenship Amendment Bill marks the victory of narrow-minded and bigoted forces over India's pluralism," Gandhi said in a statement.

The Congress chief said the bill defeats the idea of India as citizenship will be granted to refugees on the basis of religion.

"The Bill fundamentally challenges the idea of India that our forefathers fought for an, in its place, creates a disturbed, distorted and divided India where religion will become a determinant of nationhood," she stated.

Gandhi said the bill also goes against the principles of equality and religious non-discrimination enshrined in the Constitution.

It also "represents a rejection of an India that would be a free nation for all her people, irrespective of religion, region, caste, creed, language or ethnicity," she stated further.

The Congress leader pointed out that historically, India has provided refuge to the persecuted belonging to all nations and religions.

Concluding, Gandhi slammed the ruling BJP for pushing its dangerously divisive and polarising agenda.

The CAB provides for grant of Indian citizenship to the persecuted non-Muslim minorities from the three countries – Pakistan, Bangladesh and Afghanistan. The minorities include Hindus, Jains, Sikhs, Buddhists etc.

The Congress party has described the CAB an attack on the Constitution. The party said the Modi government was targeting Muslims by getting CAB passed in Parliament.

Home Minister Amit Shah has countered that by saying India will never be Muslim free. He added that Muslims will not face persecution in Pakistan, Bangladesh and Afghanistan as they are in majority there.
