Congress leader P Chidambaram denounces CAB, calls it unconstitutional

P Chidambaram, congress leader | Photo Credit: PTI

Key Highlights Terming CAB as against the Constitution, Chidambaram said that it is a sad day as Parliamentarians are being asked to do something unconstitutional The former finance minister said that CAB, if passed by the Parliament, will be challenged in the Supreme Court and the apex court will nullify it Chidambaram claimed that the people are against the proposed legislation and said that the entire Northeast is in flames

New Delhi: Denouncing the Citizenship Amendment Bill (CAB), Congress leader P Chidambaram on Wednesday, said that even if CAB is passed by the Parliament, it will be challenged in the Supreme Court and the judges of the apex court will strike it down.

ANI reports, through a tweet, the angst of the former finance minister: "Congress leader P Chidambaram on #CitizenshipAmendmentBill: It'is a sad day that elected Parliamentarians are being asked to do something unconstitutional. The Bill is patently unconstitutional. Govt says ‘130 crore ppl are supporting them’, but the entire northeast is in flames."

Congress leader Adhir Ranjan Chowdhury has also criticised the CAB and termed it as “divisive” and said the proposed legislation aims to “break“ the country.

Chowdhury remarked, "The Bill was brought to break India. Consolation price is given to smaller states in the Northeast. This Bill is half-baked, half-boiled and divisive. That's why people of Assam are angry. The Bill should not be passed in the Rajya Sabha. We will also raise our voices against it. This Bill is taking India to the danger side so everyone should worry about this."

CAB proposes to grant citizenship to non-Muslims from Afghanistan, Bangladesh and Pakistan who are followers of Hindu, Sikh, Buddhist, Jain, Parsi or Christian faiths and entered India before December 31, 2014.

The CAB stems from the promise made by BJP’s in its manifesto for 2014 General Elections.

Several opposition parties have strongly opposed the bill, terming it unconstitutional and against the pluralistic ethos and secular and nature of Indian state. The Congress, the Nationalist Congress Party (NCP), the Trinamool Congress, and the DMK have opposed it because it considers religion as the basis to grant citizenship.

While people in some north-eastern states have caused an immense stir in the region saying that CAB will alter the demographics of the region by naturalising illegal Bengali-Hindu immigrants and thereby will threaten their linguistic and cultural identity.

Lok Sabha passed the bill with a majority of 311 votes against 80 and zero abstentions.
