Citizenship Bill gets Parliament's nod amid heated debate, PM Modi says 'landmark day for country'

New Delhi | Jagran News Desk: The Citizenship (Amendment) Bill, which seeks to give citizenship to non-Muslim migrants from Pakistan, Bangladesh, and Afghanistan, was passed in the Rajya Sabha on Wednesday. The Bill was passed with 125 votes in favour and 105 against it. The legislation, besides NDA, was supported by AIADMK, BJD, TDP and YSR-Congress. The bill will now got to the Rashtrapati Bhavan for President Ram Nath Kovind's assent.

Prime Minister Narendra Modi expressed his gratitude towards the members who voted in favour of the bill and said that it is a ‘landmark day for India’.

"A landmark day for India and our nation’s ethos of compassion and brotherhood! Glad that the Citizenship (Amendment) Bill, 2019 has been passed in the Rajya Sabha. Gratitude to all the MPs who voted in favour of the Bill. This Bill will alleviate the suffering of many who faced persecution for years," he said in a tweet.

Home Minister Amit Shah, who successfully piloted the bill in both Houses of Parliament, tweeted soon after the Rajya Sabha passed the bill and said, "Grateful to PM Narendra Modi for his resolve to ensure dignity and safety for these affected people. I thank everyone for their support."

During the debate in Rajya Sabha on Wednesday, Shah had said that the Citizenship (Amendment) Bill does not take away the citizenship of any Indian Muslim and only seeks to given the same to persecuted minorities of three neighbouring countries. He also said that the spirit of Nehru-Liaquat Pact was not followed by the neighboring country, which led to the need for bringing the bill.

"We have included six religions. There is no appreciation. The only focus is on Muslims.... Are Muslims in Pakistan, Bangladesh and Afghanistan minorities.... Isn't it secularism? Will it be secularism only if Muslims are included. As per your definition, only if Muslims come, then it will be secularism," Shah said while adding that in the last five years, over 500 Muslims have been accorded Indian citizenship.

"The spirit of Liaquat-Nehru pact was not followed by the neighboring country. It is the duty of every government to follow it in letter and spirit," said Shah further said.

"What happened to that promise? I can quote several laws of Pakistan. You can't fight election there ... What happened to minorities? From CJI, President, Vice President, ECI Chief to Rajya Sabha chairman, every post was held by Muslims in India," he added.

Countering the Opposition's charge that the bill is unconstitutional, the Home Minister also said that Article 14 of the Constitution does not prohibit Parliament from making laws in this regard if there is reasonable classification.

"There is a specific class. We are taking all minorities," he said.

Opposition calls it 'dark day' in India's history

The opposition, meanwhile, called said the passage of the bill marks a "dark day" in constitutional history of India and a "victory of narrow minded and bigoted forces" over the country's pluralism.

Congress interim president Sonia Gandhi, in a statement, said that this is a 'dark day' in India's history and reiterated Congress' determination to be relentless in its struggle against what she alleged was the BJP's "dangerously divisive and polarising agenda".

"The Bill fundamentally challenges the idea of India that our forefathers fought for and, in its place, creates a disturbed, distorted and divided India where religion will become a determinant of nationhood," she said.

Former PM HD Deve Gowda also said that he against the bill as "it will totally destroy minorities and is unconstitutional". "You can't go against secularism and other constitutional principles," he said.

"I can't support such a Bill" as it would create "unrest" in the country, he added.

TMC leader Derek O'Brien also said, "This government only makes big promises but all their promises fail. Mamata Di has stated clearly that NRC and CAB will not be implemented in West Bengal".

Protests in Northeast

Meanwhile, huge protests have erupted in the Northeast against the Citizenship Bill and in Guhwati, the curfew has been extended till indefinite period. Mobile internet services were also suspended in 10 districts of Assam.

Protests have also erupted in Tripura and the Army has Assam Rifles, a paramilitary force commanded by Army officials, were pressed into service in the state. Internet services are also suspended in the entire state for 48 hours from 2 pm on Tuesday.

What is Citizenship (Amendment) Bill, 2019?

The Citizenship (Amendment) Bill, 2019 seeks to give citizenship to non-Muslim migrants from Pakistan, Bangladesh, and Afghanistan. According to the proposed legislation, members of Hindu, Sikh, Buddhist, Jain, Parsi and Christian communities, who have come from Pakistan, Bangladesh and Afghanistan, till December 31, 2014 and facing religious persecution there, will not be treated as illegal immigrants and will be given Indian citizenship.

The bill was tabled in Rajya Sabha on Wednesday was passed with 125 votes in favour of it. On Monday, it was tabled in the Lok Sabha where it was passed with 311 members favouring it and 80 voting against it.

Earlier, the bill was passed in January this year but was not tabled in Rajya Sabha following it lapsed.

(With PTI inputs)

Posted By: Aalok Sensharma
