Supreme Court gives Delhi HC four weeks to decide on TTV Dhinakaran's plea on who is the real AIADMK

The dispute over the pressure cooker symbol had warmed up during the run-up to the Thiruvarur by-poll following the death of the DMK patriarch M. Karunanidhi last year.

The Supreme Court on Thursday vacated its order to keep in abeyance a March 9, 2018 interim order of the Delhi High Court directing the Election Commission of India (ECI) to consider giving AMMK leader T.T.V. Dhinakaran a common election symbol, preferably the 'pressure cooker'.



The Supreme Court has given the ECI a green signal to process the application preferred by Mr. Dhinakaran's political group in terms of Delhi HC's March 9, 2018 order and "take it to its logical conclusion expeditiously", the court noted on the pending proceedings.



However, the Bench of Justices A.M. Khanwilkar and Ajay Rastogi put a four-week hiatus on its decision.

'On real AIADMK'

This four-week hiatus is for the Delhi High Court to decide on Mr. Dhinakaran's writ plea assailing the ECI decision of November 2017 that the O. Pannerselvam and Edapaddi K. Palaniswami faction of AIADMK party is entitled to use the name of the original

registered and recognised state political party in Tamil Nadu and Puducherry and its reserved symbol 'Two Leaves'.



The apex court judgment provides for eventualities which may arise in future, one of them being that the high court may not wrap up the case within the stipulated four weeks.



In such a situation, the ECI is free to consider giving Mr. Dhinakaran a common election symbol, preferably the 'pressure cooker', as per the interim order of the Delhi High Court on March 9, 2018. The ECI has to do this within two weeks.



The second eventuality is if the ECI issues a press note announcing elections for vacant Tamil Nadu Assembly seats or even the Parliamentary polls before the four-week deadline given to the High Court.



In such a case, the ECI should grant appropriate relief (common symbol like 'pressure cooker') to Mr. Dhinakaran as per the March 9, 2018 order within a week of the press note.



The court noted that the ECI has not challenged March 9 interim order of the Delhi High Court to consider giving a common symbol, preferably the pressure cooker, to Mr. Dhinakaran. Hence, the Supreme Court has assumed that since ECI has accepted the March 9 order.



The rival AIADMK faction led by Tamil Nadu Chief Minister E. Palaniswami had argued that the plea by Mr. Dhinakaran was "extraordinary". It had attacked the credentials of the AMMK leaders, saying "one of its leaders was in jail".



The dispute over the pressure cooker symbol had warmed up during the run-up to the Thiruvarur by-poll following the death of the DMK patriarch M. Karunanidhi last year.



However the ECI had cancelled the by-election scheduled for January 28.



On March 28 last year, the Supreme Court had "kept in abeyance" the March 9 order directing the Election Commission to consider giving the Mr. Dhinakaran "splinter group" of Tamil Nadu's ruling AIADMK party an election symbol, preferably the 'pressure cooker'.

Mr. Dhinakaran rode to a thumping victory under the free election symbol 'Pressure Cooker' during the R.K. Nagar constituency by-polls.



Mr. Dhinakaran is the nephew of V.K. Sasikala, the former confidante of Jayalalithaa. Ms. Sasikala is now undergoing sentence for corruption.
