PM Imran urges world to take note of India's Nazi-like policies before it leads to 'massive bloodshed'

Prime Minister Imran Khan. Photo: File

Prime Minister Imran Khan on Thursday once again warned the world about the "Hindu supremacist policies" of Indian Prime Minister Narendra Modi, saying it could have devastating consequences on world peace and order, just like it had under Adolf Hitler's Nazi Germany.

In a series of posts on Twitter, PM Imran said India had been moving systematically with a supremacist agenda to marginalise Muslim citizens.

"India, under Modi, has been moving systematically with its Hindu supremacist agenda. Starting with illegal annexation and continuing siege of IOJK and then stripping two million Indian Muslim in Assam of citizenship, and setting up internment camps; now the passage of Citizenship Amendment Law," he said.

The premier added that the new policies of the Indian government had been enabled by a climate of fear built around silencing dissent. He also warned that appeasement would only embolden Modi, and used the example of Hitler to hammer home his point.

"All this accompanied by mob lynchings of Muslims and other minorities in India. World must realise, as appeasement of the genocidal supremacist agenda of Nazi Germany eventually led to WWII," he warned.

PM Imran added that the policies of the incumbent Indian premier were leading the sub-continent toward massive bloodshed, and this could have devastating consequences for world peace. He noted that dissent against Modi was being ruthlessly marginalized in India.

"Modi's Hindu Supremacist agenda, accompanied by threats to Pakistan under a nuclear overhang will lead to massive bloodshed and far-reaching consequences for the world. As in Nazi Germany, in Modi's India dissent has been marginalised," he remarked, adding, "the world must step in before it is too late, to counter this Hindu supremacist agenda of Modi's India threatening bloodshed and war."

This is not the first time PM Imran has equated the Indian premier with fascist rulers of the past century. In August, PM Imran had penned an opinion piece for The New York Times in which he said that a nuclear shadow was hovering over South Asia.

In the piece, the premier urged the Indian government to move out of a zero-sum mindset so dialogue on occupied Kashmir could begin. He had also called on the world to wake up to the threat of a 'New India' governed by leaders who are a product of a Hindu supremacist mindset.

Pakistan and India have been at loggerheads ever since the Indian government revoked the constitutional autonomy of occupied Kashmir in August and imposed a military curfew in the area.
