Indian military might cannot suppress Kashmiris’ struggle: Sehrai

Srinagar, February 06, 2019 (PPI-OT): In occupied Kashmir, senior APHC leader and the Chairman of Tehreek-e-Hurriyat Jammu and Kashmir, Muhammad Ashraf Sehrai, has said that India’s military might will never succeed to suppress the Kashmiris’ ongoing struggle for securing their inalienable right to self-determination.

Muhammad Ashraf Sehrai in a statement issued in Srinagar strongly reacted to Indian Prime Minister, Narendra Modi’s threatening remarks on Kashmir. Modi during his recent visit to occupied Kashmir had stated that New Delhi will break the back of militancy in Kashmir.

Muhammad Ashraf Sehrai in his statement said that the people of Kashmir were not scared and they could not be cowed down by the threats of India. He said that the foundation for Modi’s disturbing warning was laid by Indian Army Chief, General Bipin Rawat in past.

“We are not scared and we won’t be cowed down. The threat of harsh action and breaking back of Kashmiris who are struggling for political birth right comes from an unpalatable realization,” Ashraf Sehrai said. “Both military and political leadership of India are deeply informed by the reality of Kashmir – the reality that Kashmiris will sacrifice their lives till freedom from Indian occupation. This is an unpalatable reality for the state,” he added.

Tehreek-e-Hurriyat Chairman further said that linking Kashmir dispute with development was a well-planned move by India to divert attention of world community from the real ground situation of gross human rights violations and atrocities against the Kashmiris. He said, Kashmir is not an issue of economic privileges but a political and humanitarian issue which can be resolved by the implementation of UN resolutions on Kashmir and through a sustained result-oriented meaningful dialogue among India, Pakistan and the people of Kashmir.

Muhammad Ashraf Sehrai asked New Delhi to shun its aggressive approach on Kashmir and hold plebiscite in Jammu and Kashmir so that the Kashmiri people can decide their fate by themselves.

For more information, contact:

Kashmir Media Service

Phone: +92-51-4435548, +92-51-4435549

Fax: +92-51-4861736

Email: info@kmsnews.org

Website: www.kmsnews.org
