With Rahul by his side, Hemant praises Nehru-Gandhi family

Ranchi/Dumka: Putting up a united face ahead of the crucial battle for the last two phases in Santhal Pargana, Jharkhand’s tribal heartland, former AICC president Rahul Gandhi and the mahagathbandhan’s chief ministerial face Hemant Soren on Thursday jointly held a rally in Rajmahal for the first time. Rajmahal, a minority dominated area, will go to polls in the fifth phase on December 20.JMM, which is fighting the assembly polls in alliance with Congress and RJD, has nominated Ketabuddin Sheikh. He is pitted against BJP MLA Anant Ojha, Ajsu Party’s Md Tajuddin and JVM-P’s Raj Kumar Yadav besides 19 others.While Hemant had been touring and holding multiple election rallies across different constituencies even before the start of the polls, it is for the first time he shared the stage with Rahul, who was in Jharkhand on Thursday for the third time for poll rallies.Both Hemant and Rahul made an aggressive pitch to woo voters for their alliance candidate. Hemant warned voters that soon after the Jharkhand polls, Modi government will hike prices of all basic commodities. He said, “Let me give you a breaking news. An emergent meeting is underway in New Delhi where Modi’s men are brainstorming to increase taxes under Goods and Services Taxes (GST). Prices of all basic commodities will rise sharply.” Bringing up onions prices, Hemant asked people how much are they paying now. The crowd shouted, “Rs 150.” Hemant added, “Soon after the elections, be ready to pay Rs 500. You decide who to vote for.”Taking a dig at BJP governments at the Centre and in the state, he went on, “By looting and destroying the nation build by Gandhis and Nehrus to fill coffers of corporates, BJP is now hell bent on looting the poor to help their corporate agents. This election is crucial for Jharkhand where BJP is fighting by fielding several B-teams (read split allies). So, when you go to vote, only focus on mahagathbandhan candidates. Only the mahagathbandhan government can safeguard jal, jungle, jameen and the state’s aspirations.”Congress’s spokesperson Alok Dubey said Rahul’s twin rallies on Thursday marked the end of his poll tours, which is why Hemant chose to hold at least one rally together.
