Narendra Modi: By Congress-mukt India we will fulfil Gandhi's dream

The BJP-led NDA government is known for honesty, transparency, zero tolerance on corruption and fast work delivery, PM Narendra Modi said today while addressing the Lok Sabha.

PM Modi also said that he hoped that all political parties would have a "healthy competition" in the upcoming Lok Sabha elections.

Highlights from PM Narendra Modi's address in Lok Sabha:

"This is an election year, an so it is a political compulsion for all political parties to say something in Parliament," PM Modi said. "I wish for healthy competition during election."

"When we talk of a new India, we talk of hope," PM Modi said before indirectly targetting the Congress party and the Gandhi family. "We talk of two dates -- BC and AD. BC is Before Congress and AD is... After Dynasty". This, unsurprisingly, evoked loud laughter from the treasury benches.

PM Narendra Modi has targetted Rahul Gandhi. Without naming the Congress chief, PM Narendra Modi said, "In hating Modi, the Opposition has begun to hate the nation. That is why their leaders go to London and do press conferences to show India in bad light."

The Congress party has insulted the Indian Army, the Election Commission of India and the Supreme Court, PM Modi said.

Speaking about providing electricity to all villages, PM Modi said, "I had to come and do what you [Congress] could not do."

Targetting the Opposition, PM Modi said, "A 'mahamilawat' coalition cannot work for the country." PM Modi said that leaders within this "mahamilawat" coalition will not even be able to look eye-to-eye. PM Narendra Modi was talking about a 'mahagathbandhan' or a united coaltion, which has not formally been announced.

"The people of India have seen the work a Government with a full majority can do. They have seen the work of NDA," PM Modi said. "They do not want a 'mahamilawat' government of those who assembled in Kolkata."

"Congress imposed Emergency, but [they say] Modi is destroying institutions... Congress insults Army, calls the Army Chief a Gunda but [they say] Modi is destroying institutions... Congress leaders create stories that Indian Army is doing a coup... but [they say] Modi is destroying institutions," PM Narendra Modi said. "This is like ulta chor chowkidaar ko daante."

PM Modi attacked the Congress for "failing" the country's militaries. The prime minister accused previous Congress governments of not doing enough to equip Indian armed forces.

"I used to wonder why the Congress lied about the Rafale deal with such confidence," PM Modi said. "And then I realised... under the previous Congress governments defence deals had middlemen... the Congress gets frazzled when someone works with honesty."

The Congress does not want the Indian Air Force to be strong, PM Modi said. "I am levelling a serious allegation here. You [the Congress] want the Rafale deal to be cancelled. On whose behest? For which company?"

"The Congress has become rotten now. When I saw Congress-mukt Bharat, I am merely fulfilling Mahatma Gandhi's desire," PM Modi said. (Gandhi had said that the Congress should be dissolved post Independence).

"India will be friends with both Israel and Palestine... India will be friends with both Saudi Arabia and Iran... Our foreign policy has led to India's voice becoming stronger at the world stage," PM Modi said.

PM Narendra Modi was speaking in Lok Sabha as part of the motion of thanks for President Ram Nath Kovind's Budget session address.

President Ram Nath Kovind addressed a joint sitting of Parliament on January 31, a day before interim finance minister Piyush Goyal unveiled the Interim Budget. The President's speech was largely political and he listed the Narendra Modi government's achievements.

President Kovind spoke over an hour and said that the Narendra Modi government brought changes that "altered the very face of development".

President Kovind spoke about policies such as Mudra loans and Jan Dhan bank accounts as well as legislation such as the Citizenship Amendment Bill and the 10 per cent quota bill. President Kovind also spoke about the 2016 surgical strikes as well as the controversial Rafale deal.

"This government presented the new face of India that was looking towards betterment in every field. The government has been dedicated towards the development of the nation. And the building of a new India," President Kovind said.
