Mamata to lead TMC rally against citizenship act on Monday

Kolkata (West Bengal) [India], Dec 13 (ANI): Chief Minister and TMC chief Mamata Banerjee, who vowed not to let the Citizenship (Amendment) Act implemented, will lead a protest rally against the legislation in Kolkata on Monday.

Addressing a press conference here, the TMC president announced that her party would protest against the Act on district-level across the state and vowed not to let the Act implemented in the state under her rule.

"Trinamool Congress (TMC) will carry out a protest rally against the Act in Kolkata on Monday. The rally will start from Ambedkar statue, will pass through Gandhi statue and will culminate at Rabindranath Tagore House (Jorasanko)," Mamata announced, adding that she will lead the rally.

The party will simultaneously protest in each district of the state on Sunday and Monday, she added.

TMC, a staunch opposer of the Act and the National Register of Citizens, will hold a protest rally in Jadavpur against the Act which provides for citizenship to non-Muslim refugees who reached India before December 31, 2014, from Pakistan, Afghanistan, and Bangladesh.

The Chief Minister has also cancelled her scheduled visit to New Delhi in view of the emerging situations arising out of implementation of the Citizenship (Amendment) Act.

"We share borders with Assam. We have to be with people," she said.

Notably, Assam is witnessing widespread protests over the Citizenship (Amendment) Act.

Calling the BJP-led government at the Centre a "curse", she said that the state government would not allow the implementation of the Act.

"They are able to implement the Act wherever they are in power. We are in power in West Bengal and will not allow it here. Even the people of Bengal will not allow its implementation," she said.

She accused the BJP of trying to disturb the secular fabric of the country.

The Citizenship (Amendment) Bill, which was passed by Parliament this week, became an Act with President Ram Nath Kovind's assent on Thursday. (ANI)


