Why VHP is easing the pressure over Ram Mandir construction: 5 points

The bricks brought from different parts of the country for constructing the Ram temple at Ayodhya. | Photo Credit: PTI

New Delhi: In a surprise announcement this week, the Vishwa Hindu Parishad (VHP) declared that it will not hold any agitation on the Ayodhya temple issue for the next few months till the Lok Sabha elections are over.

Interestingly, the VHP, which has been spearheading a campaign to build a Ram temple at Ayodhya for decades, had only recently upped the ante by holding several dharma sabhas across the country to drum up support for an ordinance on the building of a temple at the disputed site in Ayodhya.

It also held a ‘dharma sansad’ on the issue at Prayagraj’s Kumbh mela, the largest religious gathering of Hindus in the world.

So what explains the VHP’s apparent volte-face, and does it have any implications for the 2019 Lok Sabha polls? Here is all you need to know:

1) An inkling of the VHP’s move came a few days earlier when Rashtriya Swayamsevak Sangh (RSS) chief Mohan Bhagwat said at an event, which saw top functionaries of the Sangh Parivar, BJP leaders and dozens of Hindu saints in attendance, (as quoted by News18): “This is election season. We have to be watchful about the effect the Mandir movement would have on the electoral atmosphere.” He added that the temple at Ayodhya should not be built “just to please voters”.

2) Bhagwat’s statements were in contrast to what he and other senior RSS leaders have said about the Ram Mandir in the past few months. In October, during his annual Vijaya Dashami speech, the RSS chief had urged the central government to introduce a Bill on Ayodhya rather than “test the patience of the society”.

3) The VHP on its part claims that it doesn’t want the issue to be politically exploited. “The sant samaj shall not give the pseudo-secular pack the opportunity to drag this holy and important movement of Sri Ram Janmabhoomi into a political vortex and swamp,” the VHP resolution says. Of course, that statement conceals other factors that the VHP could have been mulling over.

4) The VHP’s move has arguably eased the pressure on the Narendra Modi government which finds itself on a difficult wicket, with the Supreme Court nowhere close to announcing a decision on the title suit. The BJP can’t afford to alienate its core supporters, and any indication that the party is not on the same page as other members of the Sangh Parivar could be counter-productive as the party starts its 2019 Lok Sabha campaign.

5) The VHP’s declaration was perhaps also influenced by Swami Swaroopanand Saraswati, a prominent Hindu priest, who set a February 21 deadline for temple construction to start. For the RSS and especially the VHP, it is important that they are seen as being at the forefront of the Ayodhya temple construction campaign.

The views expressed by the author are personal and do not in any way represent those of Times Network.
