Pledge for Delhi students to behave well with women

New Delhi: Chief Minister Arvind Kejriwal on Friday announced that the Delhi government will administer pledge to male students at all schools and colleges to behave well with girls and not indulge in crimes against women.

Addressing the FICCI women’s meet, the chief minister said mothers and sisters need to talk to boys that they will not accept them at home if they do wrong to women. Under the initiative, a one-hour classroom discussion on respecting women will be conducted.

The AAP government’s move comes at a time when the death of two rape victims from Hyderabad and Unnao have sparked a national outrage. Kejriwal said his government will repeatedly administer pledge to male students over a period of time. “The girl students will also be asked to talk to their brothers on the issue of respecting women and warn them against any wrongdoing. Once a girl talks to her brother on the issue, she will be required to tell her class about it,” he said.

The chief minister said the Aam Aadmi Party (AAP) government has taken several steps to ensure women’s safety in the national capital. “Our government has decided to light up dark spots by installing two lakh street lights…We have also deployed marshals on buses to ensure the safety of women,” he said.

Kejriwal said there is a need to improve policing in the country. Later at a press conference, he said, “In all schools, colleges, and universities in Delhi, boys will take pledge to respect women and swear that they will not abuse or misbehave with a woman.”

“We have to convince our men in the family that if they do anything wrong with any woman, he needs to face boycott from family first and then from society. Every family must do this,” he said. These initiatives are not a substitute for law and order, Kejriwal said, adding that governments and police will do their work.

“Issues about women safety will be discussed in every school and college for an hour. The sessions will be conducted frequently and facilitated by teachers,” he said. (PTI)
