Why CAB is against everything Hinduism stands for

Ashish Tripathi is a journalist with The Times of India in Lucknow. He is a firm believer in Gandhi's talisman "Whenever you are in doubt, or when the self becomes too much with you, apply the following test. Recall the face of the poorest and the weakest man/woman whom you may have seen, and ask yourself, if the step you contemplate is going to be of any use to him/her. Will he/she gain anything by it? Will it restore him/her to a control over his/her own life and destiny? In other words, will it lead to swaraj for the hungry and spiritually starving millions? Then you will find your doubts and your self melt away." LESS ... MORE

The amendment in the citizenship law is the latest stunt pulled by the ruling BJP to feed the Frankenstein’s ‘majoritarianism’ monster created in Sangh Parivar’s Hindutava lab. Unfortunately, many Hindus are rejoicing over the amendment without realising that it is not only against Constitutional values, but also against Hindu Dharma, and will devour them ultimately. Following are some points which all Hindus must consider …

The law is discriminatory against Hindus

The amendment relaxes rules of citizenship for non-Muslim refugees or migrants persecuted because of their religion in neighbouring Muslim majority countries – Pakistan, Bangladesh and Afghanistan. The aim, says government, is welfare of refugees. Sounds good and should be done, but why the same goodness is not being extended to the Hindus persecuted in the neighbouring Buddhist majority Sri Lanka and Myanmar. Similarly, it does not include Madhesis (mostly Hindus) facing discrimination in the Hindu majority neighbouring country of Nepal.

The law subverts Constitution which would eventually hurt Hindus

Since Hindus have been benefitted the most from the Constitution, tampering with its soul will eventually harm the interest of the majority religious community. The law discriminates on religious grounds which is against the principle of equality enshrined in the Constitution. It will set a precedence that would be used by others in future to come up with laws which discriminate on grounds of gender, class, caste, region, language, sect and ethnicity among other things, which will hit Hindus the most as they are the largest group in the country.

Discrimination against minorities may also put in danger life of Hindus in other countries where they are in minority. If a Hindu in US or UK wants to be treated as equal as prescribed in the laws of the these countries, the community in India will have to extend similar equality and respect to religious minorities here.

The law diverts attention from real issues

Hindus need to think why at a time when the country is reeling under economic recession, high unemployment rate, rising economic inequality and crony capitalism, the saffron brigade is one after another putting up those issues – Article 370, Ram Temple, National Register of Citizens or NRC and now citizenship law – in public domain which end up in divisive Hindu-Muslim debate. The poor state of economy is hitting all the communities, but going by their proportion in the population, more Hindus are suffering in comparison to others. However, public attention is being diverted from the real issues through communal narrative. Those in power know that if bread and butter will dominate public discourse, they will not win any election.

The law is against Hindu scriptures

Since ages, Hindus have taken pride in `Vishwa Bandhutva’ (Universal Brotherhood) and `Sharnagat Kee Raksha’ (Protecting those who seek refuge), the two core values in Hindu Dharma. However, the legislation defies Dharma by discriminating against those (including Hindus) who seek refuge in the country because of persecution in neighbouring countries. Another guiding principle of Hindus is “Raghukul reet sada chali aayi, pran jaye par vachan na jaye”(It has been a tradition of Raghu Clan since ages that words given once will always be honoured even at the cost of one’s life). Bhagwan Ram followed all these values but the law defies his legacy. We have also broken the Constitutional pledge that everyone will be treated equally irrespective of caste, creed, gender and faith.

Muslims who stayed back in India and chose secularism over Muslim nationalism. They trusted Hindu religious majority. Breaking their trust is against Hindu Dharma. These Muslims have contributed immensely in India’s freedom struggle and country’s development. They deserve equal rights and respect as promised in the Constitution.

The values stated above are common in all religions, but if Pakistan, Bangladesh, Sri Lanka and Myanmar are not following it, they are killing their souls. India cannot and should not allow it to happen.

The law promotes self-destruction as it is based on divisive politics

Like other acts of the saffron brigade, the citizenship law is also aimed at strengthening Hindu majoritarianism in India to grab and remain in power, but if allowed to succeed, it will break Hindu society into fragments as in Pakistan created on the basis of religious majoritarianism. Take the example of Muslims of different sects who opted from Pakistan. They then were carried away by the seductive notion that Muslim majority nation will offer them a better deal. Initially, it appeared utopic and instilled a sense of power.

However, within three decades, the Muslim majority broke on the issue of language, resulting in creation of Bangladesh. Also, the sect which formed majority among Muslims started persecuting those belonging to sects having numerically less followers like Shias and Ahmadis. Further, the quest of majority dominance also gave rise to conflicts based on region such as Sindh and Balochistan and social discrimination of Mohajirs (Muslim immigrants from India after partition). All these factors created a civil-war like situation and gave rise to terrorism. Now, Pakistan is falling apart.

Significantly, many among minority Muslim sects, who took part in persecution of non-Muslims – Hindus, Sikhs and Christians, are now being persecuted. These non-Muslims stayed back in the country after partition because MA Jinnah promised equal rights to all and that secularism will be his guiding principle. But they were deceived.

Now, Hindus are doing the same by imitating Pakistan. Hindus need to understand that religion formed the basis of Pakistan’s creation, not of India. We opted secular and constitutional democracy. That’s the reason we forged ahead and today have a reputation in the world. The religious majoritarianism will consume Hindu society as it did to Muslims in Pakistan and may also cause civil war as in Sri Lanka, Myanmar and Balkan countries.

Not just religious minorities, India needs to offer shelter and protect all `Sharnagats” on various grounds.

The law will make Hindus persecutors

Any religion and law based on humanism does not sanction persecution and discrimination of any kind but still atrocities on minorities are taking place world over on different grounds because of intoxicating effect of majoritarianism. In fact, persecution is integral part of majoritarianism. It converts sane minds into mobs.

For example, religious persecution of various Muslims sects is also taking place along with Hindus, Sikhs and Christians in Pakistan. Muslims and Hindus are being persecuted in Myanmar. In Sri Lanka, all non-Sinhalees communities including Hindus, Muslims and Christians are facing persecution and discrimination.

Persecution can also be on political grounds like that of Tibetans by the Chinese government, of Tamils by Sri Lanka authorities, of communists in non-communist countries and of non-communists in communist nations. It can be social (Madhesis in Nepal and lower castes in India), economic (poor Muslims and Hindus in Bangladesh) and ethnic (various minority Muslim tribes along with Hindus and Sikhs in Afghanistan).

If Hindus will take the path of majoritarianism, they too will become persecutors.

The law will make prediction of colonial rulers about Hindus true

The Britishers carefully planted fear of Hindu Majoritarianism among Muslims by raising “minorities in danger” bogey to divide and rule, thus strengthening MA Jinnah’s and VD Savarkar’s two-nation theory that eventually led to partition of India. The Sangh Parivar has carried forward the colonial legacy by zealously nourishing majoritarianism, albeit by reversing the narrative – “Hindus in danger” because of the Muslim appeasement by `secular’ parties that ruled the country after 1947. By becoming part of majoritarian politics, we will only be proving Britishers right.

Mahatma Gandhi described the notion of “majority” as a fiction constructed by British to divide and rule India. He said that we all belong to one minority or another – religious, political, social, economic, regional, lingual and ethnic among others.

Bapu was right. In the end, we all stand alone, bound together only by the constitutional values.

Hence, Hindus will actually be protecting their rights, if they stand up to fight against the law which paves way for discrimination against Muslims on religious ground. Today, it is a citizenship law, tomorrow it would form the basis of another set of laws that discriminates against all the religious minorities followed by rules that hit social, economic and political minorities. Hindus need to realise that what is good of all communities irrespective of caste, creed, gender and faith, is also good for them.

Jai Hind

Facebook Twitter Linkedin Email Disclaimer Views expressed above are the author's own.
