In solidarity with Muslims of India: Pak minister on CAA; warns of war over differences between both countries

Pakistan Railways Minister Sheikh Rasheed Ahmad | Photo Credit: Twitter

Key Highlights 'Differences between India and Pakistan will increase which might drag both countries to a war' 'Pakistan's responsibility to stand in solidarity with Muslims of Kashmir and India' 'India under Modi has been moving systematically with a Hindu supremacist agenda'

Islamabad: Pakistan Railways Minister Sheikh Rasheed Ahmad, who got an electric shock this August while spewing venom against India and Prime Minister Narendra Modi, has said it is Pakistan’s responsibility to stand in solidarity with Muslims of Kashmir and India.

Accusing PM Modi of creating problems for Indian Muslims, he said that differences between India and Pakistan will increase which might drag both countries to war.

The motormouth minister known for his silly statements had earlier exposed his own government when he said that Kartarpur corridor is the brainchild of Pakistan Army Chief Qamar Javed Bajwa and not Prime Minister Imran Khan.

After India abrogated Article 370 thereby ending Jammu & Kashmir’s special status, the minister said that a full-fledged war will be fought between India and Pakistan in October or November this year.

Ever since India revoked Article 370 and passed the Citizenship Amendment Bill, Pakistan’s diatribe against New Delhi has turned into a daily affair.

Recently, Prime Minister Imran Khan Niazi took to his Twitter account to condemn the passage of Citizenship (Amendment) Bill 2019 saying that India under Modi has been moving systematically with a "Hindu supremacist agenda".

He further alleged that minorities are being persecuted in India.

“Starting with illegal annexation and continuing siege of Jammu and Kashmir; then stripping 2 mn Indian Muslims in Assam of citizenship, setting up internment camps; now the passage of Citizenship Amendment Law,” Imran tweeted while interfering in India's internal affairs.

Khan was brutally trolled for his tweet on the Citizenship (Amendment) Bill.

The MEA also slammed the Pakistani PM for his “unwarranted comment” with spokesperson Raveesh Kumar saying that Pakistan should pay attention to its own nation rather than comment on internal matters of India. He further said that such comments do not exonerate the country's blatant persecution of minorities.
