Driver dies as oil tanker set ablaze in upper Assam

GUWAHATI/SHILLONG/KOHIMA: Even as Assam on Saturday was slowly limping back to normalcy, police detained a pro-talks Ulfa leader for his alleged role in the violence that rocked the state following the passage of the contentious Citizenship (Amendment) Bill (CAB) in Parliament four days ago.“Jiten Dutta (Ulfa leader) was picked up from his home at Digboi in Dibrugarh district,” a state police official said, adding that “since Friday, 86 people have been held across the state in connection with street vandalism”. Two days ago, RTI activist Akhil Gogoi, who heads the Krishak Mukti Sangram Samiti, and two of his companions were arrested in Jorhat and later sent to prison.At Dhekiajuli in Sonitpur district of upper Assam, a group of people set ablaze an oil tanker late on Friday night. Police sources said the driver of the tanker, which was coming from Sipajhar in Udalguri, suffered series burn injuries and died in a private hospital on Saturday morning. Dibrugarh and Jorhar, too, are located in upper Assam.“We are trying to identify those who instigated violence during protests that began on Tuesday. We have video evidence. We will take tough legal action against them,” a senior state government official said. “We hope we will be able to withdraw the suspension of internet services and lift the curfew by Monday,” he added.With the improvement in the situation, state authorities relaxed curfew in Guwahati and Dibrugarh from 9 am to 4 pm. It is during these hours that protesters usually gather at various spots to carry out their agitation.On Friday, All Assam Students’ Union (Aasu) functionaries said they would have their protest programmes till 5 pm so that miscreants could be prevented from indulging in violence under the cover of darkness. The authorities said internet services would remain suspended till Monday.Faced with mounting pressure at home, the Assam BJP legislature party on Saturday decided to send a delegation led by led by chief minister Sarbananda Sonowal to Delhi to meet Prime Minister Narendra Modi and home minister Amit Shah to apprise them of the ground situation in Assam.Meanwhile, Meghalaya authorities also announced relaxation of curfew in Shillong from Saturday. The state government decided to convene a special one-day session of the Assembly to bring in a resolution on the implementation of the inner line permit (ILP) system in the state. In Assam, opposition Congress and AIUDF separately demanded a special session of the House to discuss the issue of the new Citizenship Act. In Nagaland, opponents of the Act organised a six-hour bandh.In Assam, Aasu, Asom Jatiyatabadi Yuba Chatra Parishad and 30 other indigenous organisations continued their protests till dusk. State government employees announced that they will observe ceasework on December 18. “We will not attend work on December 18 in protest against the Act,” Sadou Asam Karmachari Parishad (SAKP) president Basab Kalita said.Northeast Frontier Railway (NFR) authorities began preparations to move passengers stranded at different locations to their destinations. They said there were about 600-800 passengers stranded at Guwahati station, who would be taken to their destinations by Saturday night or Sunday morning, NFR CPRO Subhanan Chanda said.Tension continued to prevail in North Tripura and Dhalai districts even though the Joint Movement Against Citizenship Amendment Bill had called off its indefinite strike.
