Political fight leaves schoolkids in the lurch

Mangaluru: The alleged poisoning of well water in Government Higher Primary School Shibaje village in Belthangady taluk , is taking an ugly turn with a series of protests over the past two weeks. At least eight children fell sick after consuming the water on December 2.However, there have been no arrests so far. According to sources, animosity between two groups has left 94 students in the lurch. They have not attended classes after the incident due to protest demanding police action against miscreants who poisoned the well. The school has been shut since then. On Friday, a huge protest was held in front of the school in which students, villagers, parents and others took part. The School Development and Monitoring Committee stayed away from it. “The incident is similar to the Sulawadi Maramma Temple poisoning case. The police are unwilling to take up the investigation and if this continues, we’re ready for an indefinite protest in front of the superintendent of police office in Mangaluru,” said AC Mathew, former president, Shibaje gram panchayat.He told STOI that when everyone unanimously decided to protest, workers belonging to a national political party went to students’ house and warned them not to attend it.The next day, it was reported that a water tank which supplies drinking water to the village too was poisoned. “This incident diverted attention from the school well poisoning case. Police acted swiftly in the tank poisoning by deploying the dog squad, but not in the school case.”Sources said the school well was targeted due to animosity between two groups of a political party. While the SDMC supports a member of the gram panchayat, workers of the midday meal scheme on the campus are associated with another member. These members have personal differences though they belong to the same party. The school water tap had been broken eight times since June by unknown miscreants. A member allegedly did shoddy construction work and an inquiry committee was set up.“Things went wrong when the SDMC filed a case on November 30 regarding miscreants damaging school property. As a result, miscreants poisoned the well and students fell ill. One shouldn’t target innocent children to score political brownie points,” the source said. The water samples have been sent to the FSL and the results awaited.
