Rahul Gandhi faces flak from ally Shiv Sena over his Savarkar jibe

Congress leader Rahul Gandhi while addressing the Bharat Bachao rally on Saturday took a jibe at the BJP for demanding an apology for his "rape in India" remark and said, "My name is Rahul Gandhi, not Rahul Savarkar. I will never apologise for speaking truth."

He said, "I will die, but I will not apologise for speaking the truth. It is Narendra Modi and Amit Shah who have to apologise to the country for destroying India's economy." The Congress leader also alleged that the BJP and Prime Minister Modi have set the entire northeast region on fire.

My name is not Rahul Savarkar, I am Rahul Gandhi. I will never apologise for speaking truth and nor will any Congressman do. - Rahul Gandhi

Meanwhile, the Shiv Sena on Saturday reacted sharply to Rahul Gandhi's jibe 'My name is not Rahul Savarkar', saying that there could not be any compromise about reverence for the Hindutva ideologue.

"Veer Savarkar is an idol of whole country and not just Maharashtra. The name Savarkar denotes pride about nation and self. Like Nehru and Gandhi, Savarkar too sacrificed his life for the country. Every such idol must be revered. There is no compromise on this," Shiv Sena leader Sanjay Raut said.

Savarkar is an idol of the country. He too sacrificed his life for the country. No compromise on this matter. - Sanjay Raut

Slamming the PM for demonetisation and the GST, Rahul said, "You must remember he (PM Modi) came on TV at 8 p.m. in 2016 and made Rs 500 and Rs 1,000 currency notes illegal tender. He hit the Indian economy so hard that it has been unable to recover since then."

Later, the Congress president Sonia Gandhi also addressed the rally and said, "Today the situation in the country is that of 'Andher Nagri Chaupat Raja'. The whole country is asking, where is 'Sabka Saath, Sabka Vikas'? Why the economy has sunk? Where the employment opportunities have disappeared?"

The Congress president asserted the country will fight against the amended Citizenship Act as it shreds India's soul.

"They are not bothered that this new law will shred the soul of India, as is happening in Assam and other north eastern states," she said.
