Spl session for ILP resolution on Dec 19

NEW DELHI/SHILLONG: The state government will hold a special Assembly session on December 19 to pass a resolution on the implementation of the Inner Line Permit (ILP).

The decision comes after Chief Minister Conrad Sangma and other state leaders met Home Minister Amit Shah in Delhi early on Saturday morning. Sources said the chief minister has written to the governor for convening the special session on Thursday.

He has also informed the speaker about the session.

Sources said on Saturday the NPP and others were demanding exemption of Shillong from CAA but violent protests compelled them to opt for ILP.

The state delegation — which included Metbah Lyngdoh, Prestone Tynsong, Sniawbhalang Dhar, Thomas A Sangma, AL Hek, Banteidor Lyngdoh, Hamlet Dohling, Samlin Malngiang, Saleng A Sangma and Lambor Malngiang, besides Conrad — also informed the Centre about the shortage of essential commodities following the situation in Assam.

Shah agreed to examine the matter at the earliest, Conrad said after the meeting.

AICC president Sonia Gandhi said in her speech at the ‘Bharat Bachao (Save India) rally in Delhi, “CAB, which the BJP government has brought in, will destroy the country as it has (done) in the North East. But I guarantee whoever will get injustice, Congress will stand with them.”

BJP resolution on ILP

The meeting of state BJP leaders which was held on Saturday passed a resolution to exclude the CAA in Meghalaya.

Another resolution of the BJP was on the implementation of ILP in the state.

The meeting chaired by BJP state vice president JA Lyngdoh expressed that the present volatile situation in the state is a matter of concern and the members present in the meeting stated that the decision of the Centre to exempt only Sixth Schedule areas will not serve the demand of local indigenous community.

BJP legislator from South Shillong Sanbor Shullai, state BJP general secretary Bashailang Khongwir and party vice president David Kharsati endorsed the decision.

While the BJP wanted CAA to be exempted throughout the state, the party supported ILP by saying that it was a long pending demand.

In the meeting, the party members also felt that the present structure of the traditional institutions of the state should not be touched at all.

Cong MLA supports move

Opposition Chief Whip and Congress MLA, PT Sawkmie said the Congress party supports the demand of the NGOs to call for a special session to pass a resolution demanding Inner Line Permit in the state.

Sawkmie has also written to the Union Home Minister, Amit Shah to fully exempt Meghalaya from CAA and immediately implement ILP in the state.
