Citizenship Act protests: Large number of locals participated, says Jamia administration

Large number of locals participated in the protest along with students | Photo Credit: Twitter

Key Highlights 'Demonstration was not held in University campus nor was it called by Jamia' A large number of locals participated in the protests Over 50 protesters were detained and taken to Jaitpur and Badarpur police stations

New Delhi: Jamia Millia Islamia (JMI) administration has issued a clarification saying that a large number of locals participated in the protests, adding that it was not held inside the university campus.

Students of JMI protested against the Citizenship (Amendment) Act, 2019 and the National Register of Citizens (NRC) after which many protesters and policemen were injured in the violence.

The students also called for a boycott of the exams following which JMI had to postpone all examinations.

Meanwhile, new dates will be announced in due course of time and the administration has declared winter vacation from December 16, 2019, to January 5, 2020, and the varsity will open on January 6, 2020.

Talking to news agency PTI, JMI PRO Ahmad Azeem also said that demonstration was not held in University campus nor was it called by Jamia.

“A large number of locals participated in it. We held talks with students, now they are protesting peacefully,” he said.

Protests continued in Jamia against the Citizenship (Amendment) Act, 2019 (CAA) on Saturday. Before that, as many as 12 cops were injured in Thursday protests and according to the varsity, students pelted stones at them when they were deployed to keep law and order situation under control.

The Citizenship (Amendment) Bill, 2019 which received President Ram Nath Kovind’s assent seeks to grant Indian citizenship to refugees from Hindu, Christian, Sikh, Buddhist and Zoroastrian communities who had fled from Pakistan, Afghanistan, and Bangladesh fearing religious persecution and entered India on or before December 31, 2014.

According to media reports, the march from the varsity to Parliament was organised by left-wing students from All India Students' Association (AISA) after which the Delhi Police in a bid to stop them conducted a lathi-charge and used tear gas to dispel the protesters.

Over 50 protesters were detained and taken to Jaitpur and Badarpur police stations.
