Watch | Congress Needs Open, Transparent Election to Choose Its New President: Jairam Ramesh

New Delhi: Jairam Ramesh has become the first senior Congress leader to publicly express concern about the Congress party’s failure to inquire into the reasons for its national election defeat even though nearly seven months have lapsed since that happened.

In an interview to Karan Thapar for The Wire he says the party should have “immediately set up an institutional mechanism” and that he cannot explain why it hasn’t done so, nor can he say whether it will. The only explanation Ramesh could offer is that so much else has happened that the party may not have had time to do this. He was referring to parliament, state elections and, of course, the consequence of Rahul Gandhi’s sudden decision to resign as party president.

Ramesh said that such an institutional mechanism had been set up after the 2014 defeat, colloquially called the ‘Antony Committee’. He said there were several such precedents. They should have been followed this time but so far in 2019 that hasn’t been the case.

Also read: To Fight a Presidential-Style Election in India, Congress Must Find the Right Face

In the interview to The Wire, which is the first Ramesh has given to any media organisation this year, to discuss the Congress Party and the challenges it faces, he also says that he believes “an open and transparent election” is the right way to choose the new president.

He said he completely agrees with Shashi Tharoor, who was the first senior Congress leader to speak along these lines, in an interview to Karan Thapar for Tiranga TV just days after Rahul Gandhi’s resignation.

Ramesh also said that more important than individuals, the reform the Congress party most needed were processes and institutions that will be followed by everyone. Although he did not specify what sort of processes he has in mind, one that he did identify was an open electoral process to choose the new president.

Asked whether there was any truth to the speculation that Jyotiraditya Scindia was poised to leave the Congress, Ramesh said this was “hogwash”. He said Scindia was “disappointed” with the election outcome and his own personal defeat but there was no question of his leaving the party and he was not contemplating this either.

Speaking about the Congress’s alliance with the Shiv Sena in Maharashtra, he said this was “realpolitik”. He said the situation required compromises but insisted that an alliance with the Shiv Sena was very different to any alliance with the BJP. He refused to see this as a “faustian compromise”.

Nor would he accept it has compromised Nehruvian secularism but he did say it had caused “anguish” in the party . “It wasn’t an easy decision,” he said, but in the end the insistence of the Maharashtra branch of the party had convinced Sonia and Rahul Gandhi to go ahead with the alliance.

Also read: The Maha Vikas Aghadi Could Liberate Shiv Sena and Maharashtra

Ramesh cited several incidents from the past when Congress had drawn on Shiv Sena support. These include the Emergency, A. R. Antulay’s chief ministership of Maharashtra as well as Shiv Sena support for Pratibha Patil and Pranab Mukherjee’s elections as president.

Ramesh said that the Maha Vikas Aghadi government would last five full years because the common antipathy to the BJP, which unites its three participants, will continue. He also agreed that a second binding force is the acceptance that if the alliance government collapses the BJP could sweep to power with a majority of its own and this is something the three parties wanted to avoid at all cost.

Speaking about Jharkhand, Ramesh said the explanation for not supporting Saryu Rai against Raghubar Das but instead putting up Gourav Vallabh, even though Hemant Soren, the head of the JMM had asked Congress to support Rai, was that the party has to pay attention to its own local interests and concerns.

Nonetheless, he said, the party’s overriding strategic aim in Jharkhand was to defeat the BJP. Yet he repeatedly refused to accept this overriding strategy is undermined by local factors and concerns such as those that led Congress to put up a rival candidate rather than support Saryu Rai against Raghubar Das. It’s widely believed that Saryu Rai is giving a strong fight to the chief minister and Congress’s support could have ensured his victory.

Ramesh spoke at length about his petition in the Supreme Court challenging the constitutionality of the Citizenship Amendment Act. He explained in detail why he disagrees with Union home minister Amit Shah’s claim that it does not breach Article 14 because it’s based upon a “reasonable classification”.

Ramesh said that he will field a galaxy of top lawyers, the best in the profession, to fight his case in the Supreme Court and this would include several of his senior Congress colleagues who are leading lawyers. However, he refused to name them.

Finally, Ramesh said that the government’s decision to do away with the reserved seats in the Lok Sabha and 14 state assemblies for Anglo-Indians was an issue of top concern which the Congress Party has already taken up in parliament and will continue to raise nationwide.

Here is the interview with Jairam Ramesh:
