Days after backing Citizenship Act, BJP ally Asom Gana Parishad to file plea in Supreme Court against it

Asom Gana Parishad is going to file a plea in Supreme Court against the Citizenship Act

Key Highlights 'This decision was taken as AGP respects the sentiments of common people' 'We will take the legal route to seek revocation of the amended Act as the indigenous people of Assam are apprehensive that their identity, language might come under threat' AGP leaders will also meet PM Modi and Amit Shah

Guwahati: After supporting the BJP on Citizenship Amendment Bill, Asom Gana Parishad (AGP), which is also an ally of the ruling party, has decided to file a petition in the Supreme Court against the Act with party leader Kumar Deepak Das saying that he is praying for revocation of the amended Act.

He further asserted that this decision was taken as AGP respected the sentiments of common people, who were wary that the law might threaten their very identity and existence.

"We will take the legal route to seek revocation of the amended Act as the indigenous people of Assam are apprehensive that their identity, language might come under threat," Das, a former Rajya Sabha MP, told PTI.

As per the reports, a delegation of the AGP, led by Das, would leave for Delhi in the evening to file the plea in the apex court.

Hours after this development, Assam Pradesh Congress Committee (PCC) President Ripun Bora termed reports of as 'eyewash' and said that the AGP is in connivance with the BJP.

Bora further said that the people of Assam have revolted in such a way that many stalwart leaders of AGP have resigned. Claiming that the AGP leadership is divided, Bora claimed that as they don’t have any alternative they are doing this in connivance with the saffron party.

He also said that if the AGP was really against the CAA then they should have pulled out from the ministry as well.

"Still they have three ministers in power. They (AGP) are enjoying the power with them (BJP). It is just eyewash to approach the apex court," Bora said.

The decision to go against the Act was taken in a crucial meeting of the AGP. Apart from this, the party has also decided to meet PM Narendra Modi and Home Minister Amit Shah over the issue.
