Day after Rahul's Savarkar remark, CM Uddhav Thackeray says coalition govt's work 'not based on ideology'

Maharashtra CM Uddhav Thackeray | Photo Credit: ANI

Key Highlights Maharashtra CM made the comments one day after Rahul Gandhi's controversial remarks on VD Savarkar Rahul Gandhi said he wont apologise for 'rape capital' remark as his name is not 'Rahul Savarkar' Maharashtra CM also commented on whether Shiv Sena will support newly-enacted Citizenship (Amendment) Act

Nagpur: Maharashtra Chief Minister Uddhav Thackeray on Sunday said his coalition government is working on the basis of Common Minimum Programme (CMP) and not ideology. Thackeray’s comments assume significance in the backdrop of a furore over Rahul Gandhi’s comments on Hindutva ideologue Vinayak Damodar Savarkar.

"Our government (Shiv Sena-Congress-NCP alliance) is working on the basis of Common Minimum Programme (CMP), not on the basis of ideology. Our stance on Savarkar is same as before," Sena chief told reporters in Nagpur on Sunday.

Speaking about the controversial Citizenship (Amendment) Act (CAA), the Maharashtra CM said the party will take a stance once the court decides on the matter.

“Let us first see what the court decides on CAA, we will clear our stance on it then,” he said.

Maharashtra Chief Minister Uddhav Thackeray in Nagpur: Our government (Shiv Sena-Congress-NCP alliance) is working on the basis of Common Minimum Programme (CMP), not on the basis of ideology. Our stance on Savarkar is same as before. https://t.co/HZzeSFUshb — ANI (@ANI) December 15, 2019

Rahul Gandhi drew flak from the BJP and Maharashtra ally Shiv Sena over his remarks that Savarkar was a person who sought clemency from the British.

"My name is Rahul Gandhi, not Rahul Savarkar. I will never apologise for speaking the truth and nor will any Congressman do so," the Congress leader said, adding, he will not apologise for his ‘rape capital’ remark. He made the comments while addressing the 'Bharat Bachao' rally at the Ramlila Ground in the national capital on Saturday.

Just yesterday, Shiv Sena’s Sanjay Raut warned the Congress not to insult Savarkar stating there would be no compromise on the matter.

Shiv Sena MP Sanjay Raut tweeted: “We believe in Pandit Nehru, Mahatma Gandhi. Do not insult Veer Savarkar.”

Raut further tweeted, “Veer Savarkar is the God of not only Maharashtra but the country. The name Savarkar implies national pride and self-respect. Like Nehru and Gandhi, Savarkar sacrificed his life for Independence... No compromise on this.”

Savarkar’s grandson Ranjeet Savarkar lashed out at Rahul Gandhi for his statement saying that the government should take action against him.

No one should say disrespectful words about Veer Savarkar, said Ranjeet.
