Kulgam avalanche: Seven cops dead, one missing as rescue ops underway

The Snow and Avalanche Studies Establishment has issued an avalanche warning of varying degrees to 16 of the 22 districts in Jammu and Kashmir for the next 24 hours. (Photo: ANI)

Seven bodies have been recovered out of the 10 policemen who were trapped inside their post under a snow avalanche in Kulgam, PTI reported Friday evening. While two cops have been rescued, another policeman was reported as missing, a police official was quoted as saying.

The rescued police personnel were shifted to hospital where their condition is stated to be stable, he said.

The rescue operations that began last night are still underway. Strong winds and accumulation of snow on the path are, however, hindering the operations. The avalanche hit the north portal of Jawahar Tunnel on the Qazigund side on Thursday evening.

In the avalanche incident at JT #Kulgam 07 bodies including five policemen have been recovered. One policeman is still missing. Two policemen rescued in the morning are stable.@JmuKmrPolice — Kashmir Zone Police (@KashmirPolice) February 8, 2019

“Rescue teams have reached close to the site of the avalanche this morning. All efforts are being made to evacuate the trapped persons,” a police official said.

In another incident, a couple died after snowslide buried their house in Anantnag district Thursday evening. However, rescue teams were successful in pulling out the two children safely. The victims were identified as Bashir Ahmad Qureshi and his wife. The incident took place at Sonabrari-Magam in Kokernag area of the district, the official informed PTI.

The Snow and Avalanche Studies Establishment has issued an avalanche warning of varying degrees to 16 of the 22 districts in Jammu and Kashmir for the next 24 hours, reported PTI.

High danger avalanche warning has been issued to Anantnag, Bandipora, Baramulla, Budgam, Ganderbal, Kulgam and Kupwara districts in the valley, while medium danger warning was issued to Poonch, Rajouri, Ramban, Reasi, Doda, Kishtwar, Udhampur and Leh districts. A low danger warning was issued for Kargil district.

Kashmir valley has been witnessing heavy snowfall since Wednesday with Kulgam district in south Kashmir receiving maximum precipitation. Few districts in the area have received as much as five feet snow, according to officials.
