Three thrash biryani seller, hurl casteist slurs

Dalit youth thrashed for selling biryani in UP’s Greater Noida

GREATER NOIDA: A 35-year-old biryani seller in Rabupura village was allegedly thrashed by a group of musclemen who also hurled casteist remarks at him and asked him why he was selling food in the area.The alleged assault took place on Friday evening when Lokesh Kumar had put up his stall as usual at the underpass of the Yamuna Expressway . Three of the accused — Sonu, Sandeep and Anand — arrived and asked him why he was doing business there. Lokesh’s family later said the three were from Khera Mohammadpur village.According to his relatives, Lokesh had been selling biryani around the village and nobody had ever questioned him. Mukesh Kumar, Lokesh’s brother, said that on Friday evening, Sonu and Sandeep first asked Lokesh about his caste and then sought to know if he would continue to sell biryani from there.“We only know them as local strongmen, and there is no other association with us. On Friday, after the trio arrived at the spot, Sonu and Sandeep started asking my brother about his caste. They wanted to know if my brother belonged to a particular caste and would continue selling biryani there. At first, my brother could not understand what they were up to. Soon, they had started throwing the utensils here and there and pushed the stall to the ground,” Mukesh said. He alleged that as the two started assaulting Lokesh, the third accused — Anand — recorded the incident on his phone.In a 16-second video that is being widely circulated, Sonu can be seen slapping Lokesh at first and then pushing him against the wall — all the while using casteist slangs against him. “Will you sell biryani here? Fold your hands,” Sonu is heard telling Lokesh, in between slapping him. Hands folded, Lokesh can be heard saying “koi baat nahi (it is not an issue)”, even as slaps and blows rain on him. At least seven-eight men standing near Lokesh’s stall stand mute spectators.Mukesh told TOI the accused were local strongmen from an upper caste and were drunk when they attacked his brother.“They often bully us since we belong to the lower caste. Initially, Lokesh did not tell anyone about the attack on him. We got to know about it from the video that was circulated on WhatsApp. We dialled 112 and informed police. We also gave a written complaint,” Mukesh said.SP (rural) Ranvijay Singh said the accused were troublemakers and would often create a ruckus after getting drunk.“The complainant said that there was no other fight. Since the accused can be heard using casteist remarks in the video, they have been booked under the SC/ST Act,” he said.The three were arrested on Sunday evening. An FIR was registered against them under IPC sections 323 (voluntarily causing hurt), 506 (criminal intimidation), 154 (owner or occupier of land on which an unlawful assembly is held) and provisions of the SC/ST Act.The assault led to a Twitter duel between Bhim Army chief Chandrashekhar Azad and Gautam Budh Nagar police.Earlier in the day, Azad directed a team of Bhim Army to “immediately visit the spot and take action in the matter”. Noida police chief issued a warning, saying, “Arrests will happen in the incident soon. Don’t try to spoil the atmosphere...”Azad retorted, “(We are) Being beaten up for cooking biryani and also being accused of spoiling the atmosphere... Don’t try to scare me.”
