I don't know what happened at Jamia last night: Nirmala Sitharaman

Students raise slogans as they protest against Delhi Police's action on students at Jamia Millia Islamia in New Delhi on December 16, 2019 | Photo Credit: PTI

Key Highlights Whipping up people's emotions on issues like Citizenship (Amendment) Act exposes Congress' frustration, said Nirmala Sitharaman On Sunday, there was a huge police-students face-off in Delhi's Jamia area during the protests against the amended Citizenship Act The Jamia Millia University authorities today called for a thorough probe into the entire episode

Mumbai: Amidst protests against the amended Citizenship Act, Finance Minister Nirmala Sitharaman on Monday cautioned citizens against “jihadists, Maoists and separatists” getting into student activism.

However, the Finance Minister said that she had no information about what exactly transpired at New Delhi's Jamia Milia Islamia University over the weekend.

Sitharaman further lashed out at Congress, saying whipping up people's emotions on issues like the CAA (Citizenship Amendment Act) only exposes the main opposition party's frustration.

Underlining that activism in itself is not new to universities, Sitharaman attributed the same to “idealism” that guides a student due to his/her age.

On Sunday, there was a huge police-students face-off during the protests against the amended Citizenship Act.

The Jamia Millia University authorities today called for a thorough probe into the entire episode while declaring that they will be registering an FIR on Sunday's campus intrusion and assault on students by the Delhi Police.

The authorities lashed out at the Delhi Police for forcibly entering the campus.

While addressing the media, Jamia vice-chancellor Najma Akhtar said that an FIR will be registered against police's entry into the university campus.

"We will file FIR on the damage of property and police action on students, we want high-level inquiry. I will present facts to the HRD Minister. I have already spoken to the HRD Secretary and briefed him about the situation," she added.

"What about the damage to the psyche of students? The appeal will be made to HRD Minister to ascertain who was at fault about yesterday's crackdown. We had already declared vacation because we wanted our students safe...We are not forcing any student to vacate hostels. We will facilitate it. We are making an assessment of the damage. We are not connected to any political outfit and will not allow anyone to come here," said Akhtar.

In another development, the Supreme Court today issued a strong message to the rioting students across the country.

Chief Justice SA Bobde said destroying public properties in the name of protests would not be acceptable.

"We know what are rights... What is this? Public properties are being destroyed. We will decide it in the cool frame of mind," the Chief Justice told lawyers.

The SC added that it will take into account the matters related to the purported police high-handedness on violent protests in Jamia area in south Delhi only if there is peace.

"First, we want to be assured that there would be peace, and if you want to take to the street, then in that scenario, do not come to us," said Chief Justice SA Bobde.
