Crackdown On Students An Assault On Soul Of India, Says Priyanka Gandhi After 2-Hour Long Protest

New Delhi:

After completing her two-hour long protest at India Gate against police crackdown on students, Congress leader Priyanka Gandhi Vadra said that the government is given blow to the constitution and termed the attack as an attack on the soul of the nation. "It's their right to protest. I'm a mother too. You entered into their library, dragged them out and thrashed them up. This is tyranny," she said. "Every person in Congress will fight against this tyranny and stand with the students," Priyanka added.

Launching a scathing attack on Prime Minister Narendra Modi, Priyanka said that PM should answer on what happened at the University yesterday, whose government beat up the students? He should speak on the sinking economy. His party MLA raped a girl, why hasn't he spoken on it?.

Congress leaders led by Priyanka Gandhi Vadra held a sit-in at the India Gate in a show of solidarity with the students from Jamia Millia Islamia and several other universities across the country protesting the contentious amended citizenship law.

The Congress general secretary was joined by leaders like Ahmed Patel, A K Antony, Ghulam Nabi Azad and Randeep Singh Surjewala, besides hundreds of party workers. Before sitting on the dharna at the India Gate lawns, Priyanka Gandhi cited Delhi Police action against Jamia university students to hit out at the Modi government, saying the atmosphere in the country has become “bad”.

“The country’s atmosphere is bad. Police is entering university to beat up (students). The government has tinkered with the Constitution. We will fight for the Constitution,” she said. Congress spokesperson Surjewala said the two-hour protest, which began at 4 pm, is to express solidarity with students from Jamia Millia Islamia University and other places.

Thousands of students across India took to the streets demanding a probe into the use of teargas inside the Jamia library as well as police entering the campus without permission from university authorities on Sunday. Jamia turned into a battlefield on Sunday as police entered the campus after a protest against the amended citizenship law near the varsity turned violent.

Earlier, Congress and several opposition political parties condemned the alleged police “brutality” against students of Jamia and demanded a judicial inquiry into it. “How could the police enter Jamia and unleash such brutality on the students when the university authorities did not allow the police to enter it,” Azad asked.

At a press conference, Congress leaders Azad and Kapil Sibal, CPI(M) leader Sitaram Yechury, CPI’s D Raja, RJD’s Manoj Jha, SP’s Javed Ali Khan and Sharad Yadav condemned Sunday’s police action against Jamia students.

Azad also rejected the charges levelled by Prime Minister Narendra Modi that the Congress was behind the violent protests. “It is wrong to make such accusations and we condemn it,” he said.

Yechury demanded a probe by a Supreme Court judge in the incident. “Whoever gave the permission to allow the police to enter the Jamia campus should be brought to book and punished,” he said. He said it was not a Hindu-Muslim issue and asked people not to fall prey to rumours as the act was an affront to the Constitution.

“It is the ruling party and Government of India which are behind the violence. Had the government not brought in this law, there would not have been such violence. It is the prime minister, home minister and the Cabinet who are responsible for this violence” he alleged.

Raja said that those who gave the orders for police entry in Jamia should be bought to book.

For all the Latest India News, Download News Nation Android and iOS Mobile Apps.
