Gangsters Act over rumours on social media: Noida admin after Delhi, Aligarh violence

Noida Police on Monday stepped up vigilance on ground and on social media in the wake of violent protests in Delhi and at Aligarh in Uttar Pradesh, while the district administration warned of booking those spreading rumours under the Gangsters Act.

Checkings were carried out on roads in areas, including Kalindi Kunj border near Delhi, where violence and vandalisation of public property was witnessed on Sunday during clash between police and protestors over the amended Citizenship legislation.

"No condition would be let to arise wherein any person lives under fear of any kind or communal disharmony. If somebody tries to spread hatred through social media, I have said this earlier also, that our (administration's) interpretation would be to book that person under the Gangster's Act and their properties would be attached," District Magistrate, Gautam Buddh Nagar, B N Singh said.

Police said they are identifying people sharing rumours or inciting posts and issuing them warnings on social media before initiating legal action.

Senior Superintendent of Police, Gautam Buddh Nagar, Vaibhav Krishna also warned of action against rumour-mongers on Facebook, Twitter and WhatsApp.

"We are establishing contact with groups of people which appear to be prone to falling prey to rumours. We are active on social media and monitoring Facebook and Twitter, getting updates on WhatsApp posts. Objectionable content and the people sharing it online are being identified and red cards (warning notice) being issued to them," Krishna told reporters.

"Strict action will be ensured against anyone indulging in fanning sentiments due to the incidents unfolding in Delhi or Aligarh and proceedings will be initiated against them under the CrPC 149 (allows police action to prevent cognisable offence)," he said.

About 120 people were injured on Sunday in Aligarh and New Delhi when protesting students clashed with police during demonstrations against the amended Citizenship Act.

The police chief of the district adjoining the national capital also cited attempts by influential people to disrupt public order after a matter came to light that three men thrashed a biryani vendor and hurled casteist and abusive slurs in Greater Noida.

"Noida Police ensured the arrest of the culprits within 24 hours. Some people had posted provocative messages on social media. They were warned that police will initiate action against them for fanning violence or any such activity. Incase of any problem, people can approach the police," SSP Krishna said



Bhim Army chief Chandrashekhar Azad had on Sunday called on the members of his Dalit emancipation group to "ensure action" following reports about the biryani vendor's assault.

Actor-turned-politician Urmila Matondkar had also taken to Twitter to share a media report about the incident, which she condemned.

(This story has not been edited by Business Standard staff and is auto-generated from a syndicated feed.)
