Once Rafale is inducted, our enemy will think very hard before doing anything: Air chief Bhadauria

The first batch of four Rafale fighter jets will be with the Indian Air Force by May 2020 and once the planes are inducted, the enemy will think twice before doing any misadventure, said Air Chief Marshal Rakesh Kumar Singh Bhadauria on Monday.

The air chief said the induction of Rafale is important because it will boost the air force's fighting capability tremendously. "Once Rafale is inducted, our immediate plan is to make Rafale and Su-30 as a potent force," Air Chief Marshal Bhadauria said during a session at Agenda Aaj Tak in New Delhi.

Speaking about the need to upgrade fighter aircraft, the air chief said the force's fleet of Jaguar and Mirage is also being systematically upgraded. "They are being upgraded to a level that will increase their capability manifold," he said.

NEED TO FOCUS ON INDIGENOUS DEVELOPMENT

Presenting his long-term vision for the Indian Air Force, Air Chief Marshal Bhadauria said this is the opportune time for India to focus on boosting its indigenous defence industry. "With the procurement of Rafale and S-400, we have met our immediate requirement of fighter aircraft. This is an ideal time when we should be focusing on developing indigenous aircraft and weapons."

He said the agencies concerned should focus on development of stealth technology, advanced sensors, data fusion, use of artificial intelligence, besides development of long-rage and precision weapons.

"It is always better to have indigenous aircraft. The biggest drawback with procured aircraft is that to add even a single weapon, we have to go through a long-drawn process. If the aircraft are indigenous, we can upgrade them anytime as per our requirement," he said.

ALSO FROM AGENDA AAJ TAK

Happy my daughter is not alive to see her rapists: Nirbhaya's mother Asha Devi

Assaduddin Owasi slams Delhi Police for Jamia violence, says V-C should resign

People of Jammu and Kashmir are living-corpses: Ghulam Nabi Azad targets BJP
