CAA protests: Protesters torch vehicles in UP's Mau; police fire in air

Police keep a watch as Muslim people shout slogans during a protest against Citizenship Amendment Act, at Mirza Hadipur Chowk in Mau | Photo Credit: PTI

Key Highlights Demonstrators torched 15 vehicles, including those of police, in Dakshintola area of Mau In a bid to curb the protests, police used tear gas shells, lathi-charged the protesters, and also fired in the air The Yogi Adityanath-led government has cancelled the leave of all police chiefs and district magistrates for the next seven days

Mau: Protests against the Citizenship (Amendment) Act, 2019, and police crackdown in Jamia Millia Islamia University turned violent in Uttar Pradesh’s Mau district on Monday, prompting the police to fire in the air.

As per eye-witnesses, demonstrators torched 15 vehicles, including those of police, in Dakshintola area of Mau. Police, however, said the number of vehicles damaged was four.

Speaking in Lucknow, Inspector General (Law and Order) Praveen Kumar said, "Three or four motorcycles were set ablaze. The unlawful assembly has been dispersed. Additional forces have been deployed. Presently, peace and order are being maintained."

In a bid to curb the protests, police used tear gas shells, lathi-charged the protesters, and also fired in the air.

As per Additional Chief Secretary (Home) Awanish Awasthi, senior officials reached the spot to review the situation. "The mob has been dispersed. Section 144 of CrPC is already implemented in the district," he said.

Director-General of Police OP Singh, meanwhile, informed that curfew has not been imposed. "Since the protesters were not being allowed to collect at one place, there is no problem now," he said.

Students also staged protests to express their solidarity with students of Aligarh Muslim University (AMU).

In the wake of the protests, the Yogi Adityanath-led government has cancelled the leave of all police chiefs and district magistrates for the next seven days.

Besides Mau, trouble was reported from Varanasi district where students protested against the CAA.

In Lucknow, protesters again tried to move out of the Nadwa College campus but were stopped by the UP Police in time.

As per Additional Chief Secretary (Home) Avanish Awasthi, prohibitory orders have been imposed in the entire Uttar Pradesh. Meanwhile, all schools and colleges in Aligarh will stay shut tomorrow.

Meanwhile, Aligarh SSP Akash Kulhary said that the UP Police have nabbed 21 persons and FIRs have been filed against another 56 for violent protests that occurred on the campus of the Aligarh Muslim University (AMU) last night.

According to AMU in-charge of Public Relations Shafey Kidwai: "There are an estimated 11,000 students in the hostel. With the help of 40 buses, around 4,500 students living within the 350 km radius have been evacuated. For the remaining students, the university administration has requested the railways to stop all long-distance trains in Aligarh to help the students travel back home."

"On Sunday night, rumours were spread like wildfire on social media by unidentified elements which led to protests and clashes that left Aligarh DIG Parminder Singh and SP (City) Abhishek injured," Kidwai added.
