‘Sky-kissing Ayodhya temple in 4 months’

Lord Ram temple will be built within four months: Amit Shah

RANCHI: Home minister and BJP president Amit Shah on Monday said a sky-kissing Ram temple will be built in Ayodhya within four months.Addressing separate rallies in Pakur and Godda districts, which will go to the polls in the fifth phase of Jharkhand assembly elections on Friday, Shah said, “Recently, the Supreme Court pronounced its verdict in the Ayodhya case, clearing the way for the construction of a temple and ending a dispute that lasted for more than a hundred years... Congress conspired to keep the status quo. Kapil Sibal also tried to stop the hearing this year. But SC didn’t pay heed to him and gave a unanimous verdict. Now, a sky-kissing temple will come up in Ayodhya within four months.”Making a reference to the controversial Citizenship (Amendment) Act, Shah cautioned electors in Santhal Pargana against people who support infiltrators. “The Act is meant to give citizenship to Hindus, Sikhs, Buddhists, Jains, Christians and Parsis from Bangladesh, Pakistan and Afghanistan . They faced religious persecution and had to flee to India. But opposition parties like Congress, AAP and Trinamool are indulging in vote-bank politics. I appeal to students to first read the act… It does not have any provision to take away anybody’s citizenship. However, these parties are misguiding students and inciting violence.”In Pakur, barely 40km from the Bangladesh border, Shah paid tribute to tribal freedom fighters and, in an oblique reference to illegal immigrants, asked the people to ensure that their representative is not be somebody like Mir Jafar. A powerful aide of Siraj-ud-Daulah, Bengal’s last independent nawab, Jafar refused to help the besieged ruler during the Battle of Plassey in 1757, paving the way for British rule in India. He went on to become the nawab under British patronage.“This is the land of brave freedom fighters and the Santhal Hul (revolution) was our first freedom struggle... When British infiltrators came to Santhal Pargana, a traitor like Mir Jafar supported them and allowed them to lay the foundation of their rule in India. Even today, I ask you to identify traitors like Mir Jafar and ensure they do not become your representatives.”
