Noida: Gangster Act warning over posts on Citizenship (Amendment) Act

NOIDA: The Gangster Act could be imposed against anyone spreading communal disharmony, including through social media posts, and their properties may be attached, the Noida DM warned on Monday following protests in Delhi against the Citizenship Amendment Act (CAA).Officials said all posts on social media platforms are being monitored, especially ones that may disturb peace. “If there are any stray anti-social elements who incite violence and post comments that may disturb peace, we will take strict action against them, attach properties,” said BN Singh, the district magistrate.SP (city) Ankur Aggarwal said cops were asked to stay alert and carry out checks in areas bordering Delhi. “We have multiple mobile teams in place who will respond to any distress call. We have earmarked sensitive areas and asked people to maintain law and order,” said SSP Vaibhav Krishna. SP (rural) Ranvijay Singh said police response vehicles are on alert, and they are focusing on Dadri and Jarcha areas.In Ghaziabad, a 25-year-old man was arrested and two others booked for allegedly posting objectionable comments on the CAA. The arrested youth had shared a post on WhatsApp groups in which he spread misinformation about the law recently passed by Parliament and asked people to come out in support of CAA protesters, a police officer said.Sunday night’s protests in Delhi had a ripple effect on the state’s borders the next morning. Commuters to Delhi and Faridabad were caught unawares because of traffic diversions enforced at the Kalindi Kunj signal.Commuters said had they been informed earlier, they could have tweaked their plans and reached office in time. Noida traffic police said they themselves came to know about the diversion in the morning itself.There was a long tailback at Kalindi Kunj as barricades had been placed for those travelling towards Sarita Vihar. Commuters to Faridabad, too, were not allowed to enter Delhi, except for those staying there. Some took the EPE, while others gave office the miss. “The problem was there from 8-10 am,” SP (traffic) Anil Jha said.Delhi Police officers said the road was closed following intelligence reports that outsiders might create a ruckus near Jamia Millia University.
