344 people arrested for wrong-side driving

Cops say, strong prosecution — which hampers job/passport prospects — works better in bringing discipline



Gone are the days when traffic police would issue warnings or penalisze riders driving in the wrong direction. Now, they are directly registering criminal cases against errant drivers and riders. In just three days, cops have nabbed 344 such people for taking their vehicles from the wrong side in different parts of the city.



Pune traffic police have identified 62 locations, where maximum commuters were observed taking to the wrong side of the road. They were charged under section 279 (rash driving or riding on a public way) of Indian Penal Code (IPC). The arrests continued between Friday and Sunday. The number by then was pegged at 344. While these offenders received immediate bail, a case was registered against them. It might reflect during their passport and job applications.



Deputy commissioner of police (traffic) Pankaj Deshmukh told Mirror, “The idea behind registering FIRs against the errant riders is to send a message that they cannot take traffic rules for granted. When a commuter traverses from the wrong side, he/she not only puts his/her life in danger, but also of others who are travelling in the designated direction. We are registering around 100 cases every day and we are hopeful that it will act as deterrent.”



Before registering the cases and arresting the traffic offenders, the traffic police were penalising the riders found on the wrong side. However, according to the traffic police, the monetary fine had a little impact in imposing discipline. Therefore, they have now taken to arresting the offenders, which could entail “serious implication”, said inspector (traffic planning) Rajesh Puranik. He added, “If there is a case against person, he/she will not be able to bag a government job. There are several private companies that do not accept a candidate if there is a case against them. Moreover, passport applications become a tedious process.”



The offender will also have to attend court hearings. “There is a provision of maximum of three-month imprisonment. The court will decide the punishment but till that time, the offender will have to attend the court hearings,” Puranik added.



Traffic police are also screening closed-circuit television cameras to prosecute errant drivers. The traffic police are working in coordination with the local police stations to register FIRs against the offenders.


