Narendra Modi: PM Modi says opposition alliance will fail, clears air on jobs data

NEW DELHI: Taking a swipe at the opposition alliance against his party, Prime Minister Narendra Modi said in Parliament that the people of the country did not want a “Mahamilavat” (highly adulterated) government of leaders who assembled at a rally in Kolkata and hence the opposition alliance won’t be successful in the 2019 polls. “People have seen the work a government with an absolute majority can do and they have seen the work of this government,” Modi said.With his government under fire over unemployment figures, Modi countered the charge of the Opposition and said more than 630,000 new professionals who are non-corporate taxpayers have filed tax returns in the past four years, and these people give jobs to others.“Maximum job growth has been in the transport sector. More than 1.8 crore people have been enrolled under the Employees Provident Fund between September 2017 and November 2018 over a span of just 15 months, out of which 64% are below 28 years of age. More than 1.20 crore people have been registered under the National Pension System as of last October compared to 65 lakh people registered in March 2014. Has this happened without new jobs?” the PM asked.The opposition parties, which have accused him of destroying institutions, were the ones who engaged in such activities, Modi said in his response to the debate on the motion of thanks to the President’s address in the Lok Sabha, underscoring the aggressive line of attack that the PM and the ruling BJP are adopting in their campaign for 2019 polls. The PM compared 55 years of Congress rule with his 55 months in power, saying his government had worked at greater speed in that period.“In your 55 years, sanitation coverage was around 38% and in our 55 months it is nearly 98%. Gas connections in your 55 years was 12 crore, it is 13 crore in 55 months,” Modi said.He launched a scathing attack on the Congress party and the Gandhi family in Parliament, saying that those who had imposed the Emergency were seeking to cow down the judiciary and insult the armed forces.“Congress imposed Emergency, but they say Modi is destroying institutions. Congress insults the army, calls the army chief a goonda but they say Modi is destroying institutions,” he said. “Congress bullies the judiciary but Modi is destroying institutions. Congress calls Planning Commission a bunch of jokers... but Modi is destroying institutions.” He said Congress questioning the Election Commission and the integrity of Electronic Voting Machines was in keeping with this.Modi also accused the Congress party of working against the interests of the nation and undermining the armed forces. Modi said the Congress had left the army handicapped and because of this it hadn’t been able to carry out the kind of surgical strikes across the border that it has conducted under his government’s leadership.The PM framed his argument with a BC-AD analogy — BC stands for “before Congress” and AD for “after dynasty,” he said, reviving a theme from his campaign for the 2014 election, during which he singled out the Gandhi family for attack.He also slammed the Congress over its accusations of corruption on the Rafale jet fighter deal, which party chief Rahul Gandhi has raised repeatedly. He said the Congress party wants a weak Indian Air Force, accusing it of crony capitalism and shilling for rival corporate interests. “Congress does not want our air force to become powerful. I am levelling a serious allegation,” the Prime Minister said. “Which companies are they bidding for that they are acting so shamefully?”The Congress party has no vision and hasn’t worked for the benefit of the nation, he said.The PM said he will not relent in his fight against corruption. “Modiji will frighten the people who are corrupt,” he said. “The nation has put me in this position to end corruption.”The Congress party has misused Article 356 to dismiss state governments several times, Modi said. Former prime minister Indira Gandhi had dismissed state governments 50 times, he said.Modi said politicians are prone to making wild statements in an election year but his enemies are resorting to attacking India. “A government has to work for the people of India, a government has to be sensitive to the people’s aspirations. There is no room for corruption,” he said.“We speak the truth, be it in country or outside, in Parliament or outside but your ability to listen to truth has diminished,” he said, targeting the opposition.
