MoH addresses doctors’ concerns

MoH addresses doctors’ concerns

…urges them to return to work

Sekonyela Qaitsane

MASERU – Minister of Health (MoH) Hon. Nkaku Kabi has announced that the ministry has solved one of the many concerns that were raised by doctors before they embarked on their strike, emphasizing that the ministry demands the doctors to return to work with immediate effect therefore.

It was three months ago when doctors in government hospitals announced and began their strike. Among issues they wanted was an increment on their call allowance as they also work at nights, which goes beyond the hours prescribed in their contracts – 08:00 to 16:30. They also demanded M8000 housing allowance and for their children to be paid for their fees at the schools of their (doctor parents) choice.

According to Kabi, doctors’ concerns were sound and they had all the right to complain. However he felt it was just unfortunate that at that time, the process of addressing their issues had not completed since the ministry had already started it. The reason being that the ministry considers preparing an attractive package to attract doctors outside the country to come and work back home. This he said would ultimately cut the government’s huge expenditure – M400 million annually, on South Africa and India where it outsources cancer and kidney expertise among other diseases due to lack of doctors locally

“We are still trying to convince the cabinet that if we pay doctors and nurses satisfactory salaries here at home, we will not spend even half of what we are currently spending to outsource some services. We need to attract them to work here at home so that we will have all the services here at home. We already have equipment and more is coming hence it is not an issue now. We need expertise,” he continued.

Kabi went on to announce that cabinet has approved M10, 000 housing allowance for doctors. This he said was the easiest of all the issues because all that the ministry has to do now is to redirect the money to doctors’ accounts because the ministry is already paying M15, 000 to rented house owners on behalf of the doctors. He said doctors will now have to choose whether to continue paying for those houses or opt for ordinary houses where they will pay less and enjoy what remains of the housing money issued.

However, he warned that this will not be immediate as the ministry still has to make a contract notice to the house owners that doctors themselves will be paying the rent instead of the ministry.

After this achievement which he labeled a major step in advancing the ministry’s mission of building an attractive package for doctors, he said the ministry demands doctors to get back to work immediately as this is enough to convince them that indeed their issues will be or are being addressed. The said amount he noted he considers an increment to their salaries.
