If anti-BJP means pro-Pakistan, PM Modi is speaking George Bush's language, says Kanhaiya Kumar

Former JNUSU president and CPI leader Kanhaiya Kumar has said when Prime Minister Modi says those who are protesting against the Citizenship Act are speaking in Pakistan's language, he in fact is speaking George Bush's tongue.

Speaking at a debate between him and other student leaders from different camps at the Agenda AajTak 2019, Kanhaiya Kumar said a democracy becomes democratic because of the voices of opposition.

"When PM Modi says protesters are speaking in the language of Pakistan, he in fact is speaking the language of George Bush that whoever isn't with him is with Osama bin Laden," said Kanhaiya Kumar.

Kanhaiya Kumar was referring to former US President George W Bush's controversial remark after the 9/11 attacks in which he issued a warning to other countries in the world that they are either with the US or against it.

(From left) Anima Sonkar, Siddharth Yadav, Rahul Kanwal, Kanhaiya Kumar and Mohd Alfaz Ali at Agenda AajTak. (Image: Shekhar Ghosh/India Today)

Kanhaiya Kumar said, "The country's universities are acting like the opposition that is not there. You should be thankful to these students who are out on the streets to protest against the government."

ABVP members present at the debate argued that the protest by Jamia Milia University students was not a "students' protest" as students do not indulge in violence and arson.

"Student protests aren't done like this. They don't burn buses to raise their voice. They believe in debate and discussions. Please don't defame students like this. Students don't believe in vandalising Vivekananda's statue," said Siddharth Yadav, ABVP Delhi state secretary.

To this Mohd Alfaz Ali, a Masters student at Jamia said, "10 people have been arrested over the clashes at Jamia and none of them are students of the university. No student stood up in support of these 10 men who have been arrested."

Ali then went on to ask why were students inside the university assaulted by the Delhi Police personnel, called names and taunted about their religion. "A friend who was studying in the library was hit with batons and dragged to the police station. He was denied medical attention, which is a basic human right."

He also denied student involvement in the New Friends Colony violence and said, "It must have taken at least 2-3 litres of petrol or kerosene to burn those buses. How will students, who study with the taxpayers' money, pay for this fuel?"

ABVP leader Siddharth Yadav said it is a matter of investigation to see who were behind the vandalism and why did Delhi Police personnel deny the injured students treatment.

"This is the same Delhi Police force that was there earlier as well. Home Minister Amit Shah didn't get 2 lakh men from his home state to put them in the force," said Yadav.
