Bengaluru police rule out foul play in death of techie couple found hanging from tree

They were found hanging from a tree under Hebbagodi police station limits (Representative Image) | Photo Credit: BCCL

Key Highlights The couple were facing opposition from their families over their decision to get married A shepherd had found their bodies hanging from a tree on November 29 Sree Lakshmi's uncle had even threatened them with dire consequences, co-workers told police

Bengaluru: Almost a fortnight after the bodies of a couple were found hanging from a tree in the state capital of Karnataka, Bengaluru City Police have ruled out any possibility of foul play in the deaths of Abhijit Mohan (25) and Sree Lakshmi (21). Both of them were employees of an IT company in Electronic City and were planning to get married.

While citing evidence, including the post-mortem report, police claimed that Abhijit and Sree committed suicide by hanging themselves from a tree on November 29. The post-mortem report ascertains suffocation by hanging as the cause of death. While the boy hailed from Kerala's Palakkad city, the girl was born and brought up in Thrissur.

Their deaths had come as a shock to family and friends who were looking forward to the wedding. According to a report by New Indian Express, their bodies were found in a highly decomposed state. A team of forensic experts had also collected samples from the spot where the couple reportedly took their own lives. Officers with the Hebbagodi police said that a charge sheet will be filed in the court once due process is complete.

Preliminary reports suggested that the couple took the extreme step after their respective parents opposed their decision to marry each other. They had stopped receiving their parents' calls starting October 9. This led to the parents filing missing person complaints. On November 29, six days after Sree Lakshmi called her parents and "thanked" her family for "troubling" them, her body along with Abhijit's was found by a shepherd near Chintana Madiwala in Anekal Taluk. Their friends and co-workers later told police that their parents had threatened the couple and Sree Lakshmi's uncle had warned them of dire consequences if they were to go against the wishes of their families.
