Industry minister warns Bains against spreading lies on land banks

Ludhiana: After city MLA Simarjit Singh Bains announced start of ‘sadi panchayat, sadi zameen’ campaign against the state government and Congress leaders who have been accused of trying to grab land of farmers and people living in rural area under the garb of creating land banks in rural area for industry, state industry minister Sundar Sham Arora has launched a scathing attack on Bains. Arora warned him against indulging in such a campaign, which according to the minister was nothing less than a malicious movement.Speaking on the issue Arora said, “Simarjit Bains is trying to spread malicious propaganda against our government and is spreading misinformation over the government’s decision to amend the Punjab Village Common Land (Regulation) Rules, 1964. The protest planned by LIP over the issue is a political stunt, which is aimed at wooing the people of Punjab. Bains is indulging in total falsehood and fabrications to mislead them and it is nothing but a mischievous attempt by LIP to gain some foothold in the state’s political arena, in which the party had absolutely neither any presence, nor support.”Arora added that, “The scheme to create rural land banks is voluntary and a matter of the panchayat’s choice. The panchayats will not be forced to sell any land. If a panchayat did choose to sell land, it will be fully compensated for the same. The scheme will be limited to only a few areas, as there were not more than two-three rural pockets in the entire state, which had enough land to develop proper industrial parks. Bains is deliberately and mischievously choosing to ignore them to promote his vested political interests. The LIP has no interest in the development of the state, for which industrial growth is critical. Punjab needs progress, our youth need jobs but all that Bains is interested in is promoting his own fagging political career.”The industry minister also said the Congress government was committed to bringing the state’s economic growth back on track and ensure the fulfilment of promise of ‘Ghar Ghar Rozgar Yojna’, for which industrial development is a vital imperative.
