CAA aftermath: Arundhati Roy expresses fear for the Constitution; Chetan Bhagat warns against testing youth's patience

Arundhati Roy compared the Citizenship Amendment Act (CAA) with the "1935 Nuremberg Laws of the Third Reich" and appealed to people to "stand up".

Just as celibate men should not give advice on sex, politicians who never went to college should not give advice on… https://t.co/BYnO05TpQL — Devdutt Pattanaik (@devduttmyth) 1576471193000

Vetal: What will the most perplexing thing in Kali Yuga? Vikram: Ministers and their trolls will find jihadis/Maois… https://t.co/bO5uso9IT4 — Devdutt Pattanaik (@devduttmyth) 1576501585000

Whatever their historical names, there are no Hindu or Muslim universities in India. They are all Indian universiti… https://t.co/jqKtE7rEb8 — Chetan Bhagat (@chetan_bhagat) 1576467347000

The youth is angry. There are not enough jobs. Salaries are low. Don’t mess with them. The first priority should be… https://t.co/lbfj2wgT5k — Chetan Bhagat (@chetan_bhagat) 1576464782000

Those who fantasize about India with a Hindu king and his subservient subjects, remember this. Even if I dignified… https://t.co/8xT2kJDHBJ — Chetan Bhagat (@chetan_bhagat) 1576474414000

Crashing the economy. Making jobs vanish. Shutting down Internet. Sending police in libraries. The youth may have p… https://t.co/LpQhuaQj4X — Chetan Bhagat (@chetan_bhagat) 1576464971000

We are a SECULAR country. Any bill/law that discriminates on the basis of religion and gives preference to one reli… https://t.co/Ev8TBhuWCq — Ravinder Singh (@_RavinderSingh_) 1576554271000

This protest is not by the Muslims, for the Muslims and of the Muslims. It is by the people, for the people and of… https://t.co/NW0uhX0j5Z — Ravinder Singh (@_RavinderSingh_) 1576475651000

A vow Gandhi asked his compatriots to take in 1919: "With God as witness we Hindus & Muslims declare that we shall… https://t.co/d3CHNeZZ0G — Ramachandra Guha (@Ram_Guha) 1576508095000

"...and that each shall help the other in removing them. We shall respect each other’s religion and religious feeli… https://t.co/WD0UnJjs7t — Ramachandra Guha (@Ram_Guha) 1576508236000

Let's take this vow afresh and resolve to keep it: in Jamia, in Varanasi, in Aligarh, in Mathura, in Meerut, in Sr… https://t.co/bbDY4gGLPa — Ramachandra Guha (@Ram_Guha) 1576508430000

Judging A Book By Its Cover: Authors Who Stirred A Storm







Autoplay Autoplay 1 of 6 Freshly Brewed Controversy The Bombay High Court has restrained industrialist Vijaypat Singhania from releasing his tell-all memoir. Here are other tomes that took a page out of controversy’s book. Plagiarism Plague In June 2012, American rapper Jay-Z (in pic) was sued by writer Patrick White. The latter claimed that large parts of the musician’s 2010 autobiography, Decoded, was a product of plagiarism. White claimed that his laptop was stolen in 2009, a year before the book was published, and that the book contained “expressions/colours/ phrases” that co-related to his work. In fact, the book was a collection of Jay-Z’s songs and the story behind how each one was made.





(Image: AFP)

Fallen Cyclist After Lance Armstrong (in pic) confessed to using performance-enhancing drugs, two of his fans sued him in January 2013 for lying in his two memoirs — It’s Not About the Bike (2000) and Every Second Counts (2003). Rob Stutzman and Jonathan Wheeler said they wouldn’t have bought the books if they knew they were works of fiction. A Fictional Saga American author Augusten Burroughs (in pic) was sued by his foster family, the Turcottes, for defaming them in his 2002 memoir Running with Scissors. In his book, Burroughs describes his life after his chainsmoking mother asked her psychiatrist Dr Rodolph Turcotte to be his legal guardian so that he could attend school in Northampton, Massachusetts. The Turcottes filed a suit against him in 2005 claiming large parts of the book were untrue. These included the family condoning affairs between adults and children and keeping an electroshock machine hidden under the stairs. Burroughs settled the suit in 2007. The book was then classified as fiction instead of a memoir. Striking A Chord Celebrated English concert pianist James Rhodes (in pic) had to fight his ex-wife in court to publish his 2015 autobiography, Instrumental: A Memoir of Madness, Medication and Music. She filed an injunction in court in October 2014 that sought to stop publication on the grounds that it would psychologically harm their 12-year-old son who had been detected with Asperger’s Syndrome. The book gave details of sexual abuse that the pianist had faced as a child. In May 2015, the court overturned the injunction, clearing the path for the publication of the book.

A week after the amended citizenship law was passed in Parliament, Indian writers like Arundhati Roy Devdutt Pattanaik and Ramachandra Guha called the action an 'anti-Indian' legislation that can 'break the back of our Constitution'. Some of them also criticised the police's crackdown on students of Jamia Milia Islamia and Aligarh University who were protesting against the newly-passed lawAmidst protests across the country, writer-activist Roy compared the Citizenship Amendment Act (CAA) with the "1935 Nuremberg Laws of the Third Reich" and appealed to people to "stand up"."Three years ago we stood in line obediently outside banks as demonetization was imposed on us, a policy that broke the back of our country's economy. Now the National Register of Citizens coupled with the Citizenship Amendment Bill is set to break the back of our Constitution and cut the ground from under our feet," the Booker Prize winning author said in a statement issued through Haymarket Books "Are we going to stand in line once again, obediently, and comply with this policy that eerily resembles the 1935 Nuremberg Laws of the Third Reich? If we do, India will cease to exist. We are faced with the biggest challenge since Independence. Stand up. Please. Stand up," she added.Mythologist Pattanaik suggested politicians "who never went to college" should not give advice on student activities."Just as celibate men should not give advice on sex, politicians who never went to college should not give advice on student activities, and students who never worked should not give advice on entrepreneurship," the 49-year-old author, who sent out several tweets against the CAA as well as the police action against students, wrote.In the form of a conversation between fictional characters Vikram and Vetal, he commented on ministers being clueless about rising prices of onion while they can find "jihadist/maoists in every college campus"."Vetal: What will the most perplexing thing in Kali Yuga? Vikram: Ministers and their trolls will find jihadis/Maoists in every college campus that challenges them, but be clueless as to why onion prices are so ridiculously high," he shared.Chetan Bhagat, who is known for his pro-government outlook, said, "Whatever their historical names, there are no Hindu or Muslim universities in India. They are all Indian universities. And they all must be protected."In another tweet he said "you can't wish 200mn Muslims away" and warned that it would lead to a burning country."Those who fantasize about India with a Hindu king and his subservient subjects, remember this. Even if I dignified your bigotry (I don't), you can't wish 200mn Muslims away. Try that and India will burn, GDP will crash and your kids will be unsafe and jobless. Stop these fantasies!" the 'Two States' author wrote on Twitter.Bhagat also warned the government against "testing the limits of youth's patience"."Crashing the economy. Making jobs vanish. Shutting down Internet. Sending police in libraries. The youth may have patience, but don't test the limits of it," he said.Best known for his romantic novels, author Ravinder Singh also condemned the Act calling it "anti-India"."We are a SECULAR country. Any bill/law that discriminates on the basis of religion and gives preference to one religion over other is ANTI-INDIA," the 37-year-old author said."This protest is not by the Muslims, for the Muslims and of the Muslims. It is by the people, for the people and of the people who believe in the idea of India," Singh wrote in another tweet.In a series of tweets, historian Ramachandra Guha reiterated Mahatma Gandhi's vow in 1919, in which he had asked his compatriots, Hindus and Muslims, to behave like children of the same parents."A vow Gandhi asked his compatriots to take in 1919: "With God as witness we Hindus & Muslims declare that we shall behave towards one another as children of the same parents, that we shall have no differences, that the sorrows of each will be the sorrows of the other."...and that each shall help the other in removing them. We shall respect each other's religion and religious feelings and shall not stand in the way of our respective religious practices. We shall always refrain from violence to each other in the name of religion," he tweeted."Let's take this vow afresh and resolve to keep it: in Jamia, in Varanasi, in Aligarh, in Mathura, in Meerut, in Srinagar, in Jammu, in Guwahati, in Murshidabad, and everywhere else in India too," he added.
