India-US 2+2 talks: Defence co-operation and technology transfer to dominate agenda, CAA to be discussed?

Minister of External Affairs S Jaishankar and US Secretary of State Mike Pompeo | Photo Credit: AP

Key Highlights The second “2+2” meeting between representatives of the two largest democracies is expected to see the inking of the Industrial Security Annex (ISA) The meeting will also seek to define an Standard Operating Procedure (SOP) for the Defence Technology Trade Initiative (DTTI) It remains to be seen whether India’s purchase of the S-400 anti-aircraft system from Russia, under threat of US sanctions, will be discussed

India’s Minister of External Affairs S Jaishankar, and Defence Minister Rajnath Singh are currently in Washington DC to meet with US Secretary of State Mike Pompeo, and Defence Secretary Mark Esper as the two nations look to vitalise key defence agreements. The meeting comes in the wake of Japan Prime Minister Shinzo Abe’s decision to postpone a meeting with Prime Minister Modi in Guwahati amid protests in Assam.

The second “2+2” meeting between representatives of the two largest democracies is expected to see the inking of the Industrial Security Annex (ISA) as well as a review of the Communications Compatibility and Security Agreement (COMCASA) signed at the previous session.

The ISA will permit the transfer of technology from US firms to the Indian firms in the private sector. The agreement is crucial to US firms looking to win contracts with private Indian companies, and will also allow US aviation majors to enter the Indian Air Force’s tender process for the manufacture and supply of 114 combat aircraft.





The meeting will also seek to define a Standard Operating Procedure (SOP) for the Defence Technology Trade Initiative (DTTI) that focuses on light-weight arms, virtual augmented reality technology, and drone warfare.

The two parties are also expected to review ongoing deals that include India’s procurement of 13 MK-45 Naval gun systems built by BAE Systems and 24 Lockheed Martin MH-60R Multi-Role helicopters (valued at over $2 billion). It remains to be seen whether India’s purchase of the S-400 anti-aircraft system from Russia, under threat of US sanctions, will be discussed.

Citizenship Amendment Act Controversy

Washington may also bring up the controversial Citizenship Amendment, and the widespread protests that have followed since its enshrinement into law. On December 14, US ambassador to India, Sam Brownback tweeted expressing “concerns about the implications” of the Act. Brownback’s message was retweeted by the US State Deparment’s Bureau of Central and South Asia.

According to some reports, MEA Jaishankar is likely to re-iterate Union Home Minister Amit Shah’s stance in Parliament when he said that the law is solely focussed on persecuted minorities from Afghanistan, Bangladesh and Pakistan, and has no effect on current Indian citizens.


