Andhra CM Jagan Reddy’s 'capital' plan: Amaravati (legislative), Visakhapatnam (executive), Kurnool (judicial)

File picture: Andhra Pradesh Chief Minister YS Jagan Mohan Reddy | Photo Credit: Times Now

Key Highlights Andhra Pradesh CM YS Jagan Mohan Reddy said that not much expenditure would be required to set up executive capital at Visakhapatnam. During the debate over Amaravati, the Speaker suspended nine Telugu Desam Party members for obstructing the proceedings Prime Minister Narendra Modi had laid the foundation stone for Amaravati as the Andhra Pradesh capital in 2015

Amaravati: Amid uncertainty over future of Amaravati as the capital of Andhra Pradesh, Chief Minister YS Jagan Mohan Reddy on Tuesday said the state may have three capitals.

While speaking during a discussion on the capital issue at the State Legislative Assembly, the Andhra Pradesh CM gave the example of South Africa. "Decentralised (capital) is a good concept. South Africa has three capitals. We too should change.”

“We may set up legislative capital here (Amaravati). We may constitute Assembly here. We may set up Executive Capital at Visakhapatnam. Officials may start working from there. High court may be set up in Kurnool. Thus legislative, executive, and judicial capitals may be set up at different places. We are in a condition to think of different possibilities. Probably, Andhra Pradesh may get three capitals," said Reddy.

He further said that not much expenditure would be required to set up executive capital at Visakhapatnam.

"That city has all the facilities for employees to work. One metro rail is enough. We have to think seriously. For that sake, we already have constituted a committee. That committee is studying. It may submit its report within a week or 10 days. The committee is preparing a detailed report. We have to discuss in-depth on it, take a good decision, and go ahead so that future generations will be benefitted," he said.

As the CM made the announcement, ruling YSR Congress Party (YSRCP) legislators praised the idea with the thumping of desks and slogans of 'Jai Jagan'.

During the debate over Amaravati, the Speaker suspended nine Telugu Desam Party (TDP) members for obstructing the proceedings.

Reddy further said that a final decision regarding this will be made by an expert's committee set up by the state government. The panel is gathering the opinion of people from all 13 districts of the state.

In response to Reddy's statement in the state Assembly, BJP leader GVL Narasimha Rao tweeted, "Andhra Pradesh Chief Minister YS Jagan has made a statement today in the state assembly about his plans for the state capital. On 28th August, I had predicted in a Press Conference that the state government has plans for a new capital city. #Amaravati."

Prime Minister Narendra Modi had laid the foundation stone for Amaravati, the brainchild of the then CM N Chandrababu Naidu, as the Andhra Pradesh capital in 2015. Naidu had sought to develop Amaravati on the banks of Krishna river as a world-class city.
