Situation along LoC can escalate at any time: Army Chief Gen Bipin Rawat

File picture: Army Chief General Bipin Rawat | Photo Credit: IANS

Key Highlights "We have to be prepared for the escalatory matrix," said Army Chief General Bipin Rawat During August 2019 to October 2019, 950 incidents of ceasefire violation were reported

New Delhi: Army Chief General Bipin Rawat on Wednesday cautioned that the situation along the Line of Control (LoC) can escalate at any time.

"We have to be prepared for the escalatory matrix," said General Rawat.

The Army chief made the remarks at a time when there has been a rise in the incidents of ceasefire violation by Pakistan along the LoC in Jammu and Kashmir since the abrogation of Article 370 provisions in August.

"The situation along the Line of Control can escalate any time. We have to be prepared for escalatory matrix," said Rawat.

In November, Union Minister of State for Home G Kishan Reddy had told Lok Sabha that "950 incidents of ceasefire violation along the LoC from across the border in Jammu and Kashmir were reported during August 2019 to October 2019".

Two Pakistan Army Special Service Group (SSB) soldiers were on Monday killed after the Indian Army thwarted a Border Action Team (BAT) action by them in Jammu and Kashmir's Sunderbani sector.

A 21-year-old Indian Army soldier was killed during the counter-attack.

"Pakistan carried out unprovoked ceasefire violation on the Line of Control in Sunderbani sector. The Indian Army responded effectively, inflicting substantial damages to Pakistan Army," said the Indian Army in a statement

"In the exchange of fire, Rifleman Sukhwinder Singh attained martyrdom. Sukhwinder Singh hailed from Hoshiarpur in Punjab and is survived by his parents," the statement added.

On December 12, the Pakistani Army had resorted to ceasefire violation in Shahpur, Kirni and Qasba sectors along the LoC in Jammu and Kashmir's Poonch district.

"Around 11.30 a.m. Pakistan initiated the unprovoked ceasefire violation by firing of small arms and shelling with mortars along the Line of Control (LoC) in Shahpur, Kirni and Qasba sectors in District Poonch (Jammu and Kashmir). Indian Army is retaliating befittingly," said an Indian Army statement.
