Water Bell initiative spreads across India: Doctors, teachers, students comment on whether it's really helpful

The water bell initiative started in Kerala and is now spreading across India. But is it really a good idea? Doctors, teachers and students tell us how they feel about it. (Photo: ANI)

The Kerala government took a unique initiative in early November to ensure school students drink an adequate amount of water through the day by implementing the 'water bell'. Slowly, Karnataka, Telangana and Odisha also welcomed the new initiative in the state schools. But is the water bell initiative really beneficial? Here's what doctors, teachers and students have to say about it.

The idea of a water bell has emerged because of the rise in diseases among the people due to less intake of water.

How does the water bell work?

As per this initiative, the school bell would ring thrice a day reminding students to take a sip from their water bottles.

The water bell would ring first at around 10:35 am, followed by the second bell at 12 noon, and the third bell at 2 pm. Each water break would last 15 to 20 minutes.

How did the initiative spread?

While the Water Bell initiative was first launched by the Kerala government and immediately taken up by a private school in Mengaluru, Karnataka and Telangana also joined the ranks soon after.

In late November, Odisha also decided to introduce water bells in all its Ganjam district schools, including government, private and Anganwadi ones. The timings chosen were: 11:40 am, 1:30 pm and 3:15 pm from Mondays to Fridays.

Andhra Pradesh is still mulling over the decision. Nevertheless many private schools across India have implemented the water bell already.

The school principal of the private school in Mengaluru's Uppinangady town, where the water bell was first introduced, told The Print that the decision was taken due to many complaints from parents about how their kids returned home with half of their water bottles still full.

"The government initiative made sense, as children and their health are of paramount importance," says Shunila Joy Chauhan, the principal of Thakur International School Cambridge in Mumbai, another school using the water bell.

"As an educator, it is important to understand that along with academics, the health and physical well being needs to be addressed, as children spend most of their waking hours at school," she adds.

Why do students refuse to drink water often?

As per a PTI report, Odisha's Ganjam District Education Officer (DEO) Sanatan Panda noted that despite repeated reminders of the teachers; it was found that students, especially girls, were not drinking adequate quantity of water to avoid frequent visits to the toilets.

In a country where there is a massive school dropout rate among girls when they hit puberty due to lack of gender-segregated toilet facilities, this kind of mindset among underprivileged female students is a common problem that leaves them dehydrated.

Read: 17,590 girls aged 11 to 14 put back to school in 9 months: Women and Child Development Ministry

Among the privileged class, students often become too engrossed in their classroom engagements to remember to drink water regularly through the day even when they aren't thirsty.

"I have tried fancy cups and bottles and flavouring water with honey, fruits and lemon and still the kids do not prefer water just as it is and this has been a task that has been made easier by this water bell initiative," says Priyadarshini, the parent of a class 6 student at Thakur International School Cambridge in Mumbai.

"I have found it very challenging to get my kids to drink water, as they are so used to soft drinks and flavoured beverages," says yet another parent whose ward is in the same school.

"No amount of persuasion has made them drink the necessary quantity and they end up being dehydrated with headaches and dry skin," she adds.

Doctor explains why children need to drink adequate water

"Drinking adequate amounts of water becomes more and more important in today's fast paced world, where we 'forget' to drink water," says Dr Fazal Nabi, Consultant Paediatrician and Intensivist at Jaslok Hospital and Research Centre.

"Children should be allowed to drink water as and when required during school and not restricted only to break times. Children and teenagers need to consume approximately 1.5 to 3 litres of water daily, depending on gender, age and weight," he adds.

He further explains how as a doctor, he sees many children coming with problems that could easily have been prevented by drinking enough water.

Problems from not drinking enough water

Here are 10 reasons why we need more water from Dr Harsha KN Head of Department Padeatrics, Aster RV Hospital:

1. Drinking water helps clean the toxins by hydration.

2. It helps maintain body blood pressure. It supplies electrolytes to the body and helps electrolyte balance so that all muscles and nervous system maintain equilibrium.

3. It helps in the lubrication of joints.

4. It helps forms saliva and mucus and also helps provide a cushioning effect for the brain and spinal cord in case of mild trauma.

5. Help skin tissues in maintaining integrity in case of trauma.

6. Hydration helps to absorb oxygen from the air into blood and helps diffusion of carbon dioxide from blood to air.

7. If you don't drink water, the kidneys will not excrete more urine and you will land up with health issues.

8. It helps in muscle growth in case of any injury.

9. Around 60% of the body is made up of water. It helps in regulation of body temperature so that body temperature is maintained.

10. Lack of water can lead to acidity and heartburn. Intake of water is essential during physical exercise as a lot of toxins are produced which are flushed out with good hydration.

Does the water bell create problems in conducting smooth classes?

We need to note that giving 15 to 30 minutes of water break to students thrice a day amounts to around 1.5 hours of break on a school day just for drinking water.

Though the initiative is a very positive and unique move to prevent dehydration in students, implementing it smoothly might be a task that would disrupt the normal class flow for some time yet.

"A little disturbance was caused initially but children have settled down and as soon as the bell rings, they reach out for their water bottles. It also leads to frequent trips to the washroom and teachers have been instructed to excuse them accordingly," explains school principal Shunila Joy Chauhan.

"When the bell rings we all have water, initially it was very new and we would be in between class and suddenly we had to stop doing our lessons and reach for our water bottles, but now it's become a part of our routine and I can feel how this is becoming a habit," says Niki Bathiya, who studies in class 6.

"This idea is wonderful and we are happy that our teachers and friends all get to take care of each other," she adds.

"We have read the importance of drinking 8 glasses of water per day, however to make this a reality is challenging as we are so busy with our schedules and classes," says class 5 student Deeva Sharma.

"At the beginning it was a fairly new addition in between our lessons. But it has now become a part of our daily schedule," she adds.

Most parents are happy with the water bell initiative as they observed how their kids' water intake increased. Moreover, they believe the water break at intervals promotes the habit of self care among children.

What other problems can arise from the water bell initiative?

If we take into account the vast number of government schools in India - especially in rural areas -- with still no access to toilets, the water bell forcing students to compulsorily drink water might be an issue.

Read: 30 million Indian school children have no access to toilets

Moreover, while a water bell forces all children to drink water at specific times, allowing them to follow their body clock might be more beneficial.

We can only hope that the water bell initiative will put students in a routine where they will remember to drink water regularly on their own, and as per the needs of their own body.

Read: Kerala govt bring water bell for school students to keep hydrated

Read: Odisha's Ganjam district schools to introduce 'water bells' from tomorrow
