Narendra Modi nailed directly: Congress on report that PMO held parallel Rafale talks with France

A report that the Ministry of Defence objected in 2015 to the PMO's "parallel negotiations" with France on the Rafale defence deal has drawn a furious reponse from the Congress, which has long raised allegations of crony capitalism in the agreement.

"Layers of Rafale scam tumble out! PM Modi nailed directly," Congress spokesperson Randeep Singh Surjewala tweeted on Friday, citing a report by N Ram, the publisher of The Hindu newspaper. (Scroll down for a detailed breakdown of the article.)

#PakdaGayaModi, the Congress tweeted from its official party handle, saying the prime minister had "single-handedly undermined India's position".

"It is absolutely clear that that the prime minister has stolen Rs 30,000 crore of your money, bypassed a process and given it to his friend Anil Ambani," party president Rahul Gandhi said at a press conference, in a message for young Indians and the armed forces.

Signed, sealed & now delivered for the whole country to see. Your lies are out in the open Modiji, the Defence Ministry clearly opposed your interference in the Rafale deal & you have single handedly undermined India's position. #ChowkidarChorHai #PakdaGayaModi pic.twitter.com/8nGic1xH4V Congress (@INCIndia) February 8, 2019

India's main opposition party has alleged that the NDA's Rafale deal -- for fewer jets overall but more planes in a flyaway condition -- is costlier than the UPA-era deal, now scrapped. A second allegation: that Reliance Defence, one of the jetmaker's offset partners, was chosen under pressure from the Centre.

The BJP said Union Ministers Arun Jaitley and Nirmala Sitharaman -- the defence minister -- had already given detailed statements on the issue. Party leaders accused Rahul Gandhi of spreading lies.

Defence Minister Nirmala Sitharaman told Parliament on Friday that the newspaper report ignored then Defence Minister Manohar Parrikar's written appeal for calm.

Now let's break down what The Hindu article says.

A Defence Ministry (MoD) note dated November 24, 2015 , said "parallel discussions" by the Prime Minister's Office" had " weakened the negotiating position of the MoD and [the] Indian negotiating team."

, said "parallel discussions" by the Prime Minister's Office" had " and [the] Indian negotiating team." G Mohan Kumar , who was then the defence secretary, wrote the following message on the printed note: "RM may pl. see. It is desirable that such discussions be avoided by the PMO as it undermines our negotiating position seriously ." RM, or Raksha Mantri, is a reference to Manohar Parrikar , who is now chief minister of Goa.

, who was then the defence secretary, wrote the following message on the printed note: "RM may pl. see. It is desirable that such discussions be avoided by the PMO as it ." RM, or Raksha Mantri, is a reference to , who is now chief minister of Goa. The Defence Ministry note asked the PMO that officers who weren't part of India's negotiating team " refrain from having parallel parleys " with French officials.

" with French officials. In case the PMO was "not confident about the outcome of negotiations being carried out by the MoD", the note said, " a revised modality of negotiations to be led by PMO at appropriate level may be adopted in the case ".

". The note says the Defence Ministry learned of the PMO's parallel negotiations from a letter mentioning a phone conversation on October 20, 2015 , between Joint Secretary in the PMO Jawed Ashraf and Luis Vassy , a diplomatic adviser to France's defence minister. This letter was from General Stephen Reb , the man leading France's negotiating team.

on , between Joint Secretary in the PMO and , a diplomatic adviser to France's defence minister. This letter was from , the man leading France's negotiating team. On November 11, 2015, Jawed Ashraf informed the leader of India's negotiating team -- Air Marshal SBP Sinha -- that he had indeed spoken to Luis Vassy, who had contacted him "on the advice of the French President’s office".

-- that he had indeed spoken to Luis Vassy, who had contacted him "on the advice of the French President’s office". The note warned that France may "take advantage" of "parallel negotiations" by " interpreting such discussions to their benefit " and weakening India's position.

" and weakening India's position. "This has precisely happened in this case", the note said, citing the following " glaring example ": General Reb, the head of the French negotiators, said no bank guarantee was provisioned in the supply protocol "taking into consideration the outcome" of the Jawed Ashraf-Luis Vassey conversation. The note said this was "contrary" to the MoD's stance.

DON'T REMEMBER EXACT CONTEXT OF NOTE: FORMER DEFENCE SECY

Former Defence Secretary Mohan Kumar, who left a handwritten message on the note for Manohar Parrikar, told India Today TV he didn't remember the context in which he wrote it.

"I don't remember the exact context in which I made that note," he said. "I handled many files regarding this over a long period. Without understanding the context I cannot say anything...Moreover I do not wish to respond further on this."

He later told ANI the defence ministry's dissent note had nothing to do with price, and that it was about sovereign guarantees and general terms and conditions.

'YOU DON'T WANT AIR FORCE TO BE STRONG'

In an address to Parliament on Thursday, Prime Minister Narendra Modi said the Congress wanted the Rafale deal cancelled as it was batting for another company.

"You do not want the Air Force to be strong. With which company are you siding? At whose behest you have been speaking so?" he asked, charging that middlemen were always part of defence deals when the Congress was in power.

BJP leaders have alleged that the Congress has been batting for Eurofighter, which was in competition with Rafale for India's bid to acquire the fighter planes.

Asked today about PM Modi's allegation that the Congress was weakening the Air Force, Rahul Gandhi claimed Narendra Modi has stolen thousands of crores, that the Defence Ministry had clearly he was carrying out parallel negotiations, and that "the truth has come out."

Inputs from PS Gopikrishnan Unnithan and PTI
