Ruia College revokes invitation to AAP leader Ruben Mascarenhas after CAA protests

Ruben Mascarenhas

Indian Democracy

Aam Aadmi Party

Ruia College

Anushree Lokur

Untitled Carousel Mumbai Police draws massive security plan for Thursday's NRC/CAA protest meet at August Kranti Maidan The Mumbai Police has drawn an elaborate security plan for the scheduled protest meet at August Kranti Maidan against the implementation of the Citizenship Amendment Act (CAA) and the National Register of Citizens (NRC), on Thursday.

An invitation is withdrawn if something serious comes to light. I am not acriminal. The college has invited politicians for this event before Ruben Mascarenhas, AAP

Untitled Carousel Farhan Akhtar urges people to gather at August Kranti Maidan over CAA, NRC; says time to protest on social media is over The actor's post comes at a time when top Bollywood actors have maintained their silence over the issue, despite violent protests across the country.

was to be a panellist for discussion on ‘Present-dayand Knowledge’; principal says invitation norms weren’t followedRuben Mascarenhas, the national joint secretary of(AAP), was dropped as a panellist from an event held on Wednesday at. Mascarenhas had been asked to participate in a discussion on 'Present-day Indian Democracy and Knowledge', but he said his invitation was cancelled a day after he took part in the anti-NRC and anti-Citizenship Law protests at the Kalina campus of Mumbai University.Organisers of 'Vox Populi' (voice of the people), an annual conclave at the college, withdrew the invitation on the eve of the event after the college management objected to the presence of a politician in light of the political atmosphere in the state, Mirror has learnt. However, principal Drdenied that the reason of cancellation.She said the students didn't take the permission to call Mascarenhas, as they have to do for every invitee. "Students will not point out the main reason for not seeking our permission. The reason for refusal had nothing to do with politics," Lokur said.Students said that while there was an inadvertent delay on their part to seek official permission, the authorities indeed declined nod citing the current political scenario.Mascarenhas pointed out, "An invitation is withdrawn if something serious comes to light. I am not a criminal. The college has invited politicians for this event before."Students told Mirror that after Mascarenhas confirmed his availability on December 14, there was a weekend when it was difficult to seek permissions. They said they met college authorities on Monday afternoon and they did not expressly object at the time. "They only told us to steer clear of political controversies. By evening, they declined the permission. We met them again on Tuesday and tried to convince them that we had invited Mascarenhas based on his work, which was linked to the topic and not because of his political position, but they did not concede," said some students. According to them, the college said it couldn't afford to have a politician on the panel given the unrest. "We were looking forward to having him on the panel. The withdrawal of invitation had nothing to do with him as an individual and we have conveyed the same to him," they said.
