Tata Sons vs Cyrus Mistry: Battle for the Board

The December 18 order of the National Company Law Appellate Tribunal (NCLAT) reinstating ousted Tata Sons chairman Cyrus Mistry as chairman comes as a major embarrassment for Ratan Tata at the fag end of his illustrious career. Tata was the prime mover behind Mistry's sacking by the Tata Sons board in October 2016, deftly bringing in new independent directors such as private equity investor Amit Chandra and industrialists Ajay Piramal and Venu Srinivasan and staging a boardroom coup that cornered Mistry. It also saw his removal as director from all group companies as well. That the Mistry family owned Shapoorji Pallonji (SP) group has an 18 per cent stake in Tata Sons was of little help. The SP group was up against a Goliath, with Tata Trusts, chaired by Ratan Tata, holding 66 per cent in Tata Sons. However, Mistry cleverly converted the battle into a majority shareholder-versus-minority shareholder one, taking on Tata initially at the National Company Law Tribunal (NCLT) where he challenged his removal, and later, when he was not given relief there, at the higher forum, the NCLAT. At every stage , Mistry positioned himself as the victim, championing minority shareholder rights and seeking to overturn board decisions taken after his ouster, including one that converted Tata Sons into a private firm from public.

MORE FROM INSIGHT | Why Tata Trusts is at loggerheads with the income tax authorities

On Wednesday, Mistry would have been the happiest man in Mumbai's corporate circles, for not only did he win back the chair he was forced to relinquish, but also elicited out of the NCLAT remarks that went sharply against Tata, his close confidant and former Tata Sons vice-chairman N.A. Soonawala and the board. Mistry cannot still claim final victory as the Tatas have made it clear they will seek further legal options, which clearly include approaching the Supreme Court. But for him, this was half the battle won, and his words echoed that sentiment. "Today's judgment is not a personal victory for me, but a victory for the principles of good governance and minority shareholder rights," Mistry said in a statement. "For over 50 years, the Mistry family, as the significant minority shareholder of Tata Sons, has always endeavoured to play the role of a responsible guardian of an institution that the entire nation is proud of. The outcome of the appeal is a vindication of my stand taken when the then board of Tata Sons, without warning or reason removed me, first as the executive chairman, and subsequently as a director of Tata Sons." For the Tatas, the NCLAT order was clearly shocking. "The NCLAT order appears to even go beyond the specific reliefs sought by the appellant (Mistry). Tata Sons strongly believes in the strength of its case and will take appropriate legal recourse," its statement to the media read.

MORE FROM INSIGHT | Citizenship Amendment Act: The anatomy of a protest

The acrimonious battle between Mistry and Tata was one of the worst boardroom battles India Inc has seen, bringing to the fore such questions as the powers of promoters in summarily removing top executives (in this case, without adequately explaining the reasons upfront, but later alleging non-performance), the extent of powers of retired, larger-than-life executives (such as Tata) in the running of the day-to-day matters of a group they were once associated with, issues related to corporate governance, and the power of minority shareholders vis-a-vis majority shareholders. A lot of these issues are likely to be debated again in the apex court if Tata plans to take the matter there. The stakes are high in this battle for control of a group with over $110 billion (Rs 7.8 lakh crore) in revenues, 29 listed companies under its belt, operations in 160 countries, and employing over 660,000 people.

MORE FROM INSIGHT | While Bengal was Burning

Mistry had initially challenged his October 2016 removal as chairman before the NCLT, but lost the case in July 2018. Following this, he had moved the NCLAT, which heard the case till July this year, and finally came out with its order on Wednesday. When the case was before the NCLT, Mistry's other major contentions were: the SP Group be given board representation proportionate to its holdings; the 'oppressive' clauses in the articles of association of Tata Sons that were being 'misused' to exert control over the firm by Tata Trusts be removed; and the September 2017 decision to take Tata Sons private be reversed as it 'endangered' the interests of minority shareholders.

In its judgment on December 18, the NCLAT said the resolution of October 24, 2016 passed by the board of directors of Tata Sons removing Mistry was 'illegal' and he is restored to his original position. It also declared current chairman N. Chandrasekaran's appointment illegal. In future, to better protect the interest of all stakeholders including the minority group, the Tata Group's majority shareholder should consult the minority group leader, i.e. the SP Group, and any person on whom both the groups have trust regarding appointments of executive chairman and directors of Tata Sons, said the order.

MORE FROM INSIGHT | General Naravane's challenges

As regards the conversion from 'public company' to 'private company', the action taken by the Registrar of Companies was against the provisions of Section 14 of the Companies Act, 2013 and 'prejudicial' and 'oppressive' to the minority members and depositors, and is, therefore, considered illegal, the NCLAT ruled.

The ruling will be challenged in the apex court as and when Tata Sons moves it, but at the moment Mistry's victory also underlines the laggard performance at group companies which he had alleged were legacy issues. He argued that he had flagged these to the board as well as to Tata whom he had kept in the loop on most matters, and that he had put in place a framework to deal with them. In his letter to the Tata Sons board immediately after his ouster, Mistry picked up companies and projects such as Tata Steel and its European arm, Indian Hotels, Tata Capital and the Tata Motors Nano project, among others, and elaborated why most of these needed to be fixed. Mistry warned that the group may face $18 billion in write-downs because of the five unprofitable businesses he had inherited as chairman. Mistry alleged that the foreign acquisition strategy of the Tata Group, with the exceptions of JLR and Tetley, had left a large debt overhang. Other laggards were the UK and Kenya operations of Tata Chemicals and the telecom business (which was subsequently merged with Bharti Airtel). The Nano project, Tata's brainchild, was bleeding continuously. Mistry also alleged he was pushed by Ratan Tata to enter the aviation sector in partnership with Air Asia and later with Singapore Airlines, even though the businesses did not seem promising. Tata Sons rebuffed these arguments, saying Mistry was fully aware of them since he was associated with Tata Sons as a director on the board for many years prior to his appointment as vice-chairman in 2011 and then as executive chairman in 2012. It also said that in the four years he was chairman Mistry brought little improvement in the problem companies he had highlighted.

The focus, therefore, will again be on these group companies now. There is likely to be immense shareholder interest in the manner in which group companies are run, and the decisions taken by the boards. Shares of key Tata group companies tumbled on the BSE on Wednesday following the NCLAT order. Tata Motors fell over 3 per cent, Tata Steel 2.21 per cent, while Tata Communications was down 7 per cent at the close of trading. All eyes will now be on Mistry in this bitter legal war. Will he fight to the finish, or consider the NCLAT order a major victory and prefer to seek an end to all bitterness? Going by his persistence so far, Mistry will not give in so easily. After all, in 2017, he had even fought at the NCLT to secure his rights to challenge the Tatas, after the latter cited technicalities that prevented minority shareholders from doing so, and won that battle too. That said, the sooner all parties sort out their differences the better, for at stake is the reputation of one of India's oldest business groups.

Read | Vindication, says Cyrus Mistry after winning war against Tata Group, returning as chairman

Read | Chronology of events in Tata-Mistry fight before NCLT, NCLAT

Watch | NCLAT restores Cyrus Mistry as executive chairman of Tata Sons
