Delhi metro updates: Gates of several metro stations including Rajiv Chowk, Barakhamba reopened

Delhi Metro stations closed today | Photo Credit: PTI

New Delhi: The Delhi Metro Rail Corporation (DMRC) on Thursday reopened several metro stations in the national capital after shutting down the gates of as many as 19 stations earlier in the day over protests against the Citizenship (Amendment) Act.

The DMRC tweeted that all entry/exit gates of Rajiv Chowk, Chandni Chowk, Barakhamba, Mandi House, Pragati Maidan, Lal Quila, Jama Masjid, Delhi Gate, ITO, Janpath, Khan Market, Vasant Vihar and Munirka stations are now open.

Gates of Vishwavidyalaya, Patel Chowk, Central Secretariat, Udyog Bhawan and Lok Kalyan Marg are also open, confirmed the DMRC in another tweet.

Earlier in the day, as many as 19 metro stations were shut down in national capital on Thursday as a precautionary measure to curb protests in the national capital over the CAA.

Commute for Delhiites via road today wouldn't be seamless either as some roads were shut down and routes diverted leading to traffic snarls during peak hours.

The entry and exit gates of the Delhi Metro's stations on the Violet Line including Jamia Millia Islamia, Jasola Vihar, Shaheen Bagh and Munirka metro stations are closed on Thursday in the backdrop of protests in the national capital over the newly-enacted citizenship law.

To find out details about the shutdown you can reach out to Delhi Metro's helpline 24x7 number: 155370

Security Update



Entry & exit gates of Vasant Vihar and Mandi House are closed. Interchange facility is available at Mandi House. — Delhi Metro Rail Corporation (@OfficialDMRC) December 19, 2019

Road number 13 A between Mathura Road and Kalindi Kunj would be closed for traffic movement in view of the Citizenship (Amendment) Act 2019 (CAA), a statement from Delhi Police said.

he police have advised people travelling from Noida to Delhi to take the Delhi Noida Direct Flyaway or Akshardham road instead of Kalindi Kunj.

Traffic Alert :-

Traffic congestion has been reported at Delhi-Gurugram border on NH 48 due to barricading by Delhi Police. @TrafficGGM is on the spot to facilitate the traffic. Inconvenience caused is highly regretted. @gurgaonpolice . pic.twitter.com/5R0TcHf8Rc — Gurugram Traffic Police (@TrafficGGM) December 19, 2019

Section-144 of the Code of Criminal Procedure which prohibits the assembly of more than 4 people in an area, has been imposed near Red Fort in view of impending protests. A large number of protesters had gathered in the Red Fort area where Section 144 has been imposed. Some of the protesters were detained as well.

The Delhi police did not allow permissions for protest marches in the capital.

“Permission has not been granted for the march to be held under the banner of 'Hum Bharat Ke Log' against Citizenship Amendment Act from Lal Quila to Shaheed Bhagat Singh Park (ITO) at 11:30 am today.

The police also disallowed another planned protest march from Mandi House to Jantar Mantar over CAA and NRC at 12 pm on Monday.

A huge jam built up at the Delhi-Gurgaon border as Delhi police barricaded roads amid planned protests in the capital.

The traffic situation is likely to be hit around Mandi House as Delhi Police laid four-layered security cover to deter protesters.
