Anti-CAA protest: Ramachandra Guha detained by Bengaluru Police

Bengaluru City Police has detained over 40 progressive thinkers and activists in the city, who were protesting against the Citizenship Amendment Act.

A police reserve force deployed in strength around the Town Hall detained several placard-holding protesters. Prominent among those arrested include noted historian and author, Ramachandra Guha. The city police detained Guha when he tried to defend his right to take out a peaceful rally and attempteded to address the media.

Reacting to Guha's detention, Kiran Mazumdar Shaw, Chairman and Managing Director, Biocon Ltd tweeted “This is shocking n reflects the total lack of understanding of fundamental freedom to express dissent – a peaceful protest shd not be mishandled in this manner.”

While well-known historian and author, William Dalrymple in his tweet said “Historian Ramachandra Guha, Mid-Interview, Detained By Police while talking about non-violent protest.” Earlier in the day, Kannada Chaluvali Vatal Paksha (KCVP) leader, Vatal Nagaraj, was detained at his residence in Dollars Colony minutes before he planned to take out a protest.

The police were seen rounding up protesters from surrounding streets and roads as they were making their way to the spot. A similar scene played out at Mysore Bank Circle when people started gathering there.

Prohibitory orders in force

As a precautionary measure, Bengaluru city police on Wednesday night clamped prohibitory orders for three days from December 19 to 21. With police imposing Section 144 of the IPC in the city, gatherings of more than four persons is prohibited.

Yediyurappa appeals to public to maintain calm

Karnataka Chief Minister B S Yediyurappa has appealed to all political parties, leaders and people in general to maintain calm.

Speaking to reporters at his home office, the State's Chief Minister said that the CAA is no threat to the people of this country. It is only an act applied to the people from other countries who seek citizenship. CAA does not discriminate people on the basis of religion. Citizenship is accorded on the basis of their nationality and not on the basis of religion or caste.

He further claimed that the Opposition parties and leaders who are opposing this are doing it with a political intention and people of this country are intelligent to understand their motto.

“CAA is a constitutional provision, there is no question of states rejecting it. As a member of the federal set-up, every state is bound by the constitution,” he explained.

Congress, the principal opposition party in Karnatala, on Thursday filed a petition in Karnataka High Court against the imposition of 144 Section in the state especially in Bangalore.

The petition was filed by Rajya Sabha member and Chairman, AICC Research Department Prof M V Rajeev Gowda and MLA representing Jayanagar constituency in State Assembly Sowmya Reddy
