Bengaluru man tweets if it'll be 'dry day' in city amid Section 144, police replies

Bengaluru police replies to Twitter user's 'Dry day' query | Photo Credit: Twitter

Key Highlights Bengaluru police kept netizens updated about the developments through their official Twitter account While most users asked questions about traffic and public transport services, one curious user wanted to know if December 19 will be a dry day

In order to discourage protests against the Citizenship (Amendment) Act 2019 (CAA) and the National Register of Citizens (NRC), section 144 was imposed across the city of Bengaluru on Thursday.

People gathered in large numbers with placards and the tri-colour in their hands at the Town Hall of the city.

The protesters alleged that the police personnel threatened them with firing tear gas shells. However, the police denied all reports about tear gas shelling orders and requested people to not spread rumors.

The police also specifically cautioned the students and asked them to maintain peace and not get provoked emotionally by any information. According to reports, the cops detained around 50 people and among them was Historian and biographer Ramachandra Guha.

On social media, Bengaluru police kept netizens updated about the developments through their official Twitter account. While most users asked questions about traffic and public transport services, one curious user wanted to know if December 19 will be a dry day.

Much to his surprise, Bengaluru police had a clear and straightforward answer to the question.

“Sec.144 has been imposed throughout the city. Education, banks, and markets will remain functional. All transport services will be available tomorrow as usual. Don't be in panic,” Bengaluru police tweeted at 10:30 PM on December 18

Sec.144 has been imposed throughout the city. Education, banks and markets will remain functional. All transport services will be available tomorrow as usual. Don't be in panic. @CPBlr — BengaluruCityPolice (@BlrCityPolice) December 18, 2019

To this, a user called Souvik Chakraborty replied, "Will it be a dry day tomorrow?"

Will it be a dry day tomorrow? — Souvik Chakraborty (@oldmonkwalking) December 18, 2019

Bengaluru police was quick to reply, "Everything will run normal." Happy with the brisk response, Chakroborty wrote, "Thank you Saaaar, you made my day."

The query by Chakroborty and the answer by Bengaluru police left netizens in splits. Many praised the police department for answering the most basic queries of media users without any hesitation or differentiation.

Here are some reactions to Souvik's tweet:

Man got his priorities right — Akshay (@unapologeticak) December 18, 2019

Even I wanted an answer to this question. Thanks — Prasad Shinde (@prasad2096) December 18, 2019

Legend. — Silly Wonka (@Rumpelstilt5kin) December 18, 2019

The most important Question asked..! Roadies Salute bro — Bibhu ranjan (@Bibhuranjan7) December 19, 2019

Here are some reactions to Bengaluru police’s reply:

Hats Off to this Reply. — Samurai Wala Jack (@NastikEngineer) December 18, 2019

Savage



This man have rightly got his priorities @oldmonkwaliking — Rishabh Verma (@rvrishabh0306) December 19, 2019

This was very important for bangalore police to answer, says a lot about their priorities — Rise Above Hate (@IndiaRiseAgain) December 19, 2019

One user quipped, "Sir, because everything is normal, could you please tell us where the drunk and driving checkpoints will be so that we can avoid them. Kindly thanking you!"

"Thanks to the police for assuring drunkards that they can carry on as normal without a care in the world." wrote another.
