Karnataka: 2 civilians dead as anti-CAA protest turns violent in Mangaluru; police resort to firing; curfew imposed

A passengers sustained injuries after stones were pelted on a multi-axle bus of the #Mangalore depot… https://t.co/W8TWGV158n — TOI Mangaluru (@TOIMangalore) 1576766523000

Curfew imposed in Mangaluru central sub-division following escalation of violence till midnight on December 21.… https://t.co/7STDBoXS7Q — TOI Mangaluru (@TOIMangalore) 1576758723000

Cops injured

Qazi calls for peace

Compensation sought

District minister's appeal

School children, office goers had a tough time returning home

KSRTC bus damaged

School day

MANGALURU: Police action on violent mob protesting against the Citizenship Amendment Act (CAA) and proposed National Register of Citizens (NRC) claimed two lives on Thursday. City Police commissioner Dr PS Harsha has identified the deceased Jaleel Bengre, 49, and Nauseen Kudroli, 23. They succumbed to what Harsha said "legitimate use of force" when a mob tried to set fire to the Mangaluru North Police station.The Central Business District of the Coastal city turned into a war zone with police resorting to multiple tactics of crowd control including firing, preceded by caning and use of tear gas after a mob gathered to protest CAA and NRC, defying Section 144 that was in place for 48 hours from Thursday.Following escalation of violence, curfew (Strict implementation of Section 144) has been imposed in five police stations, Mangaluru North, Mangaluru South , Barke, Urva and Mangaluru East police station limits, under Mangaluru central sub-division till 6pm on December 20. Harsha said that additional force has been deployed.Meanwhile, deputy commissioner Sindhu Rupesh ordered closure of anganwadis, government and private schools and colleges, including degree, on Friday in view of the prevailing situation. Bar and restaurants have also been ordered to shut down on Friday.The situation in the city was normal in spite of protests elsewhere in the state and country, but the picture changed at around 2pm when a group went in for a protest to be stopped by the police citing prohibitory orders near Hamilton Circle. Crowds gathered in large numbers on Nellikai Road and started pelting huge stones on the police who caned the mob to disperse them. When the mob turned violent, tear gas shells were used at around 3.30pm.At 5pm police resorted to firing in the air when the mob regrouped in various streets of Bunder area- Azizuddin Road, Bibi Alabi Road and lanes. They started shouting slogans, burning tyres and few two wheelers, damaging cars parked on the street and attacking the police with stones and whatever they could lay their hands on.As the situation turned tense, city police commissioner, called upon Muslim leaders to convince the mob. Several leaders including former mayor K Ashraf and corporators Shamshuddin and Muneeb Bengre, Attaullah from SDPI and Musthafa Kempi arrived at the spot to pacify the mob. Ashraf who walked towards the angry mob was seriously injured and was immediately rushed to the hospital. Police requested people to vacate the Ibrahim Al- Khaleel mosque and announcements were made from Kutchi Memon Masjid in Bunder requesting the mob to clear.Senior citizens caught in the mob were escorted by the police to safer areas.Later in the evening Police Commissioner PS Harsha said that though it had been made amply clear that Section 144 of the CrPC was in force, a mob started moving from Nellikai Road towards DC’s office at around 2pm. "They had stones, bottles and were picking up other materials from the ground to attack police. Our appeals fell on deaf ears and we had use force to disperse the unruly mob. But within a few minutes the mob, numbering about 6000 to 7000 gathered at Rao & Rao circle with stones, bottles and missiles to throw at the police to create an atmosphere of fear and we used many tear gas shells to disperse the mob. In the meanwhile, another mob gathered at Kudroli and attacked Mangaluru North police station. The mob was in a murderous mood and tried to set fire to the station. To save the lives of the police personnel, with no option left, we had to open fire in the air. But that did not deter them and they advanced and attacked eight to nine police and then we had to use force against them."Harsha said that the department held talks with Muslim Central Committee and other religious leaders on Wednesday and they had assured that they would not protest and if they did they would do so on another day with police permission.: Harsha said that about 20 police personnel were injured, of them, nine received serious injuries.Deputy commissioner of police Law and order Arunangshu Giri and DCP Crime and Traffic Lakshmi Ganesh were injured. Miscreants threw a stone at Lakshmi Ganesh’s leg and Arunangshu suffered a deep cut injury on his hand.: Qazi of Mangaluru Twaqa Ahmed Musliyar in a voice message on social media has appealed to the youth of the community to maintain peace and co-operate with the police.He appealed to people to stay indoors on Friday in order to maintain law and order. "We don’t expect anybody to be on the streets on Friday," he warned.: K S Mohammed Masood, president Muslim Central Committee has urged the government to compensate the families of the deceased and inhured suitably. He has appealed to the city police not to harass the community members by barging into households. At the same time, he has assured co-operation of the community in maintaining peace.: District minister Kota Srinivas Poojari in a video message, while appealing to all concerned to maintain peace, said both PM and home minister have clarified that CAA is not against any specific community. I have directed the district administration to maintain peace.: With the situation growing tense in the Bunder area, school children and office goers in the area had a tough time returning back home. The city police had cordoned off the area from the Clock Tower. Students from a tutorial in Bunder were trapped in the classroom after violence broke and as the situation was slightly under control, they were asked to leave the premises with police protection. Similar was the case with the fisherwomen at the central market. Most of them left behind fish preserved in ice and rushed back home. The area around Hamilton Circle wore a deserted look with most business establishments remaining close.: Late in the evening, stone was pelted on Mangaluru division depot 2 Multi axle vehicle and the window glass was damaged. A passenger also sustained minor injuries in the incident. The injured passenger was identified as Sundar GK from Lalbagh here. He sustained a minor injury near his eye, said KSRTC personnel who was in the hospital with the patient. The personel said the single stone was pelted from a building beside the NH.: Several schools had organised their school day on Thursday. The celebrations had to be called off mid way.
