Pro CAA march: BJP attempts a show of strength with RSS in ABVP at SPPU

Sources revealed saffron outfits rallied in response to NCP’s Sule marching a day prior; at Mandai, anti-CAA/NRC protest swelled to a thousand



A march organised by the Akhil Bharatiya Vidyarthi Parishad (ABVP), supporting the Citizenship (Amendment) Act or CAA, turned into a show of strength for the Bharatiya Janata Party (BJP), at Savitribai Phule Pune University (SPPU) on Thursday.



Incidentally, the march was planned only after several SPPU students brought out a rally opposing CAA on Wednesday in the presence of Nationalist Congress Party (NCP) Member of Parliament (MP) Supriya Sule and Congress youth wing state president Satyajeet Tambe.



Over 500 people took part in the march from Aniket Canteen till Ambedkar statue at the varsity.



Along with ABVP, a group of Bharatiya Janata Yuva Morcha (BJYM) city unit members took part. City unit chief of Rashtriya Swayamsevak Sangh (RSS) Mahesh Karpe, BJP’s western Maharashtra organising secretary Ravi Anaspure, BJP leader Pradeep Rawat, Samasta Hindu Aghadi president Milind Ekbote and members of Bajrang Dal, too, walked in solidarity.



A BJP source revealed that a decision on the participation of other parties was taken only after Wednesday’s walk. “Messages to participate were sent out from the party on Wednesday night. We were told to remain present in university though it was an ABVP march,” said a BJP functionary.



BJYM city president Deepak Pote justified their decision, saying, “These anti-national people are misleading citizens. The act is important for security of the nation, and we participated to create awareness about it. This is also our answer to the Wednesday’s march.”



~~72892831~~

BJP sources also revealed that the city unit of RSS and senior BJP leaders were included in the planning and mobilisation. But when asked, the leaders said they had participated in solidarity. Karpe told Mirror, “I have come here to participate because I wanted to support ABVP members and the march. I am just walking with them to show solidarity.” Anaspure added, “We got messages that the march is being organised and that we should participate.”



However, Anil Thombre of ABVP Pune unit said, “We started planning this protest three days ago. We did not invite our parent bodies like BJYM and BJP. But since they got to know about the march, they supported us.” He also alleged that Sule gathered the protesters by misleading them and that students participating in Thursday’s march were genuine supporters of CAA and NRC in the country.



Ekbote said, “This Act is on the lines of what Dr Babasaheb Ambedkar stated in 1947 — that we will allow refugees to enter the country without changing religion. The protests against the Act are misleading citizens. I participated in the march to support Amit Shah as a member of the Samasta Hindu Aghadi.”



Several students were also found shouting ‘Rahul Gandhi ******* hai’ throughout the march. Pratik Gudhati, an ABVP member, said, “We are supporting the Act and want to show others that there is much confusion about it. This march will ensure that all misconceptions are removed.”



~~72892834~~

ON THE FLIPSIDE



In a larger gathering also on Thursday, around 1,000 students and citizens came together in the evening at Phule Wada and walked till the Tilak statue in Mandai, protesting CAA.



Social activist Subhash Ware said, “Youngsters who launched the protest against the Act show that they do not want any religious boundaries and want to be free from them.” Anupam Barve, a participant, said, “The spirit of the act is nothing but divisive politics.”



Students from SPPU, ILS Law College and Fergusson College, among others, participated. SPPU student Satish Gore said, “We plan for a larger protest, where we expect at least a lakh students and citizens.”



CPM leader Ajit Abhyankar said, “There is no need for NRC. This is being done to create polarisation on the basis of religion. We will not cooperate with NRC and won’t submit any documentary evidence to prove our citizenship, whatever be the consequences, including putting us in jail.”



~~72892827~~

Lost in translation



As ABVP members began marching, a girl was seen among them, holding a banner in hand in support of CAA and NRC and walking with other supporters. Interestingly, the girl is from Thailand and was being mistaken for a citizen of the Northeast by several participants. When they realised their mistake, they quickly made her leave the place, although she walked along with them till the university gate. Asked about her reason for participation, she said, “I am doing my masters in philosophy. This is my first year here. I am from Thailand. I don’t know what this march is about.”




