'Who is tutoring you in anti-national activity': IPS officer slams Farhan Akhtar

CAA

IPS officer Sandeep Mittal

Farhan Akhtar

Mumbai

August Kranti Maidan

IPS officer Mittal's tweet to Farhan Akhtar

Untitled Carousel Sushant Singh's exit from Savdhaan India not linked to CAA protest, says channel Among the scores of Bollywood artistes who spoke out against the Citizenship Amendment Act (CAA) and the Delhi Police crackdown on students at Jamia Millia Islamia was actor Sushant Singh.

Untitled Carousel Mumbai Police draws massive security plan for Thursday's NRC/CAA protest meet at August Kranti Maidan The Mumbai Police has drawn an elaborate security plan for the scheduled protest meet at August Kranti Maidan against the implementation of the Citizenship Amendment Act (CAA) and the National Register of Citizens (NRC), on Thursday.

Untitled Carousel Ruia College revokes invitation to AAP leader Ruben Mascarenhas after CAA protests Ruben Mascarenhas was to be a panellist for discussion on ‘Present-day Indian Democracy and Knowledge’; principal says invitation norms weren’t followed

With protests being held across the country over, seniorhas accused actorof breaking the law and also questioned who was tutoring him in the anti-national activity.The IPS officer made the remark while reacting to actor-filmmaker Farhan Akhtar's tweet urging people into join him in protesting the Citizenship Amendment Act (CAA).This evening, under the banner of 'Hum Bharat Ke Log', protesters will congregate atin Mumbai.Along with his tweet, the actor had also given a detailed chart that explains why people are against the controversial act.Sharing an explainer video of section 121 of the Indian Penal Code, Mittal, an IPS Officer of the 1995 batch, tweeted: "You also need to know that you've committed an offence u/s 121 of Indian Penal Code and it is not unintentional. @MumbaiPolice & @NIA_India are you listening. Please think of the nation that is giving you everything in your Life. Understand the Law."The top cop also said that the nation presumes that he would have full control over the crowd of protesters he is assembling and it would remain peaceful.Reacting to another tweet by Akhtar in which he clarified about the map of India shared along with the invite, Mittal said, "Now that you have admitted that the graphics shared by you was shared by you unknowingly, please tell the nation who is tutoring you in anti-national activity to incite the public."Interestingly, Mittal seems to be replying to actors who are protesting against the CAA.The cop also responded to Huma Qureshi's tweet where she said that this government has failed the people of this country. "The law is created lawfully by a lawful government for minorities of other countries. It does not affect 'our own people; in any way whatsoever. But certain people like you are dividing people by spreading false narrative. You, and not government, have failed India & it's people," he said.Senior lawyer Prashant Bhushan accused Mittal of threatening citizens exercising their fundamental rights and called him a disgrace to the force."And you need to know that threatening citizens who are exercising their fundamental right of peaceful protest is gross misconduct on the part of a police officer. Such officers are a disgrace to our force and must be dismissed," said Bhushan.In view of the protest march the city police have put in place security measures. Along with the local police, Riots Control Police (RCP), Quick Response Teams (QRT), SRPF will be deployed.Meanwhile, entry and exit gates of seven metro stations have been closed in Delhi. The Karnataka police have issued prohibitory orders (Section 14)4 in the Dakshina Kannada district besides it being in place for three days in Bengaluru. In Chennai, the city police removed a group of protesting students of the University of Madras from the campus.
