Business as usual for Tata Sons Chairman N Chandrasekaran

MUMBAI: For Tata Sons chairman N Chandrasekaran, it’s been business as usual post the NCLAT verdict.Top officials close to the chairman said there has been no major business impact of the order. “He has been busy concluding transactions and business deals as part of his regular duties as chairman of Tata Sons and other operating companies,” said an official.On Wednesday, the appeals body had restored ousted chairman Cyrus Mistry as the chief of the group holding company and ruled Chandrasekaran’s appointment illegal. Mistry’s reinstatement will be operational after four weeks.The NCLAT order also directed that Mistry be reinstated as a director on the board of Tata Sons as well as other group companies, notably. This part of the order has not been stayed.But the officials cited earlier said no board meeting of Tata Sons or other operating companies are on anvil.“Tata Sons or the operating companies have not called any board meeting on the issue. We will comply with the legal requirements of the order as advised by our legal team, including the addition of Cyrus Mistry to the list of directors on the Tata Sons website (as directed by NCLAT),” said an official close to the development. The Tata Group will fight the case all the way to the Supreme Court, he added.“In a note sent early Thursday morning to CEOs and CFOs of all Tata operating companies, Chandra (as he is widely referred to) urged them to focus on business plans and day-to-day operations and to work normally. He has been working on two major deals since yesterday (Wednesday),” said a top official. “This is a legal issue and we will follow the legal course. Our company secretary and legal counsel are looking into specifics,” he said.Bhaskar Bhat, director of Tata Sons, said: “I am more than confident that chairman Chandra will continue his role and responsibilities, and has the support of all stakeholders. I am sure that the NCLAT order will not distract him from guiding the group forward. In my opinion, this is a purely legal matter.”Chandra and his top legal team discussed the order and its implications with Tata Trusts chairman Ratan Tata in Mumbai till late Wednesday night, an official said.The order had led to concerns about Chandra’s legal status, which, industry officials said, would create uncertainty and confusion around ongoing large-scale restructuring as well as capital raising and investment plans.A Tata Sons spokesperson said there has been a clear communication to the entire group that it is business as usual.Bankers who approached Tata Sons on the subject were also updated and concerns addressed, officials said. “There are no immediate plans to assuage concerns of global investors since markets will be closed for Christmas and New Year. Any plans on that will be worked on early next year,” an official said.“I am sure that even Cyrus Mistry would not want to disrupt the normal operations of the group where he is a shareholder,” said another director seeking anonymity. Another top official of Tata Sons said the directors have been kept abreast of the developments.“Unlike the earlier situation where there was a change of chairman as it was cited as a loss of confidence (on the part of majority shareholders of Tata Sons), there is no issue of that sort with the current chairman. He has the backing of the board and stakeholders,” said another top group director.Chairman Chandrasekaran has to focus on business stability at least for the next four weeks, said In-Govern MD Shriram Subramanian. “For now Cyrus Mistry is a director on board of Tata Sons but there should not be any immediate business implications,” he said.Following the verdict, Chandrasekaran had reached out to employees to stay focussed on businesses and welfare of the stakeholders. “Tata Sons firmly believes in the strength of our case and will pursue the appropriate legal recourse. I urge all employees to stay focussed on their businesses and the welfare of our stakeholders,” he had said.
