PM Modi is chaiwala for polls, later he is Rafalewala: Mamata Banerjee hits back

Mamata Banerjee has hit back at PM Modi over his attack on the Opposition for banding up against the BJP. (Image: PTI)

A day after PM Narendra Modi called the Opposition unity rally in Kolkata a 'maha milawat', West Bengal CM Mamata Banerjee hit back at PM Modi and said just before the elections he calls himself a 'chaiwala' and when the polls are over, he becomes 'Rafale wala'.

Addressing a gathering in Kolkata, Mamata was quoted by ANI as saying, "During elections, he (PM) becomes 'chaiwalla' and after the election he becomes 'Rafale wala'."

This comes on a day when PM Modi attacked the Mamata Banerjee government while campaigning in Bengal's Jalpaiguri.

Hitting back, Mamata Banerjee said, "He [PM] doesn't know India. He reached this position only after Godhra and other conflicts. He is a master of Rafale. He is a master of demonetisation... He is a master of corruption. He is master of arrogance."

Issuing a warning to the ruling BJP, the Bengal chief minister further said, "If you take 'panga' with us, I will become 'changa'."

Speaking in the Lok Sabha on Thursday, PM Modi referred to Mamata Banerjee's January 19 rally in Kolkata that was attended by 20 Opposition parties and said no one wants a coalition government because they know what a government with full majority can do.

PM Modi said that a maha milawat (adulterated) government is not something the nation wants.

Reacting to Modi's attacks, Mamata Banerjee said on Friday, "He is afraid because we are working together. I was never scared and I have always fought my way out. I have always respected 'Ma-Maati-Maanush'. It is a misfortune that he has become the PM because of the power of money."

In a direct standoff between the Centre and Bengal government last week, Mamata Banerjee stood up to the CBI trying to arrest and interrogate Kolkata Police Commissioner Rajeev Kumar and sat on a dharna against the Modi government for three days.

She alleged that the Modi government is misusing investigating agencies like the CBI to get back at Opposition leaders who are working against him.
