Qureshi Again Writes To UN On Kashmir Issue

Qureshi Again Writes To UN On Kashmir Issue

ISLAMABAD - Pakistan Foreign Minister Shah Mahmood Qureshi has again written a letter to the UN Secretary General and the President of the Security Council to raise the Kashmir issue.

In a series of letters in recent months, the Foreign Minister has consistently updated the United Nations Security Council and the UN Secretary General Ant nio Guterres on the situation in Kashmir, the Foreign Office said.

In his latest letter on December 12, Qureshi apprised the UN Security Council and Secretary General on Indian actions that continue to escalate tensions in an already tense environment in South Asia .

The Foreign Minister urged the UN Security Council to play its rightful role and also reiterated Pakistan's proposal to strengthen UNMOGIP's presence in the region.

India maintains that the UN Military Observer Group in India and Pakistan (UNMOGIP), established in January 1949, has outlived its utility and is irrelevant after the Simla Agreement and the consequent establishment of the Line of Control (LoC).

Qureshi also warned that India could launch false flag attack to divert world attention from Kashmir.

He asked the Security Council to play its rightful role in averting any threats to peace and security in South Asia as well as bringing an immediate end to the ‘suffering’ of the Kashmiri people.

The earlier letter by Qureshi to the President of the UNSC and the Secretary General were written on August 1,6,13 and 26, September 16 and October 31.

Be Part of Quality Journalism Quality journalism takes a lot of time, money and hard work to produce and despite all the hardships we still do it. Our reporters and editors are working overtime in Kashmir and beyond to cover what you care about, break big stories, and expose injustices that can change lives. Today more people are reading Kashmir Observer than ever, but only a handful are paying while advertising revenues are falling fast. ACT NOW

CLICK FOR DETAILS

Related
