2 killed in Mangaluru, one in Lucknow as protests turn violent

2 killed in Mangaluru, one in Lucknow as protests turn violent

Anti-CAA protests rock pan-India cities, thousands detained in police action

BENGALURU, Dec 19 (Agencies): At least two people were reportedly killed in Mangaluru as the anti-citizenship law protesters clashed with the police on Thursday. However, Mangaluru City Police Commissioner P S Harsha said two people were admitted in ICU and 20 police personnel were injured.

In Lucknow, one person was killed dead as the protests took a violent turn in the city. He was admitted with a gun shot injury at Trauma Center during the time of protests. However, it is not clear from whose gunshot he died. DGP has denied that any firing was done from police end.

Two persons were killed as police lobbed tear gas shells, resorted to baton charge and fired in the air to disperse anti-CAA protesters in Mangaluru, as thousands of demonstrators hit the streets in many cities and towns across Karnataka on Thursday defying prohibitory orders.

Scores of people including historian Ramachandra Guha were among demonstrators who were detained and later released. Vehicles were set on fire and stones hurled at police personnel as protesters allegedly went on the rampage in Mangaluru.

Police retaliated by firing in the air to warn them after tear gas shells and a baton-charge proved futile. Religious preachers too made a fervent appeal to people through loudspeakers of a place of worship not to resort to violence.

The Mangaluru police commissioner has imposed curfew with immediate effect till the midnight of Friday in Central sub-division of the city covering five police stations, a top district official told newspersons.

One person has died, allegedly due to a firearm injury, during the violent protests against the Citizenship Amendment Act in Lucknow on Thursday.

The deceased, according to sources, has been identified as Mohd Wakeel, a resident of Sajjad Bagh in Hussainabad area, IANS news agency reported.

It is not yet clear if he was killed in police firing.

"That is for the forensic experts to decide what kind of bullet took his life. He came here with a bullet injury in the stomach and we tried to save him but he succumbed to the injury," said a doctor in the Trauma Centre of the King George's Medical University.

The police maintained a studied silence on death.

News Agencies reported that anti-citizenship law protesters went berserk in parts of Lucknow, hurling stones and damaging police outposts and a number of vehicles mainly in the Old City areas of the Uttar Pradesh capital, forcing police to use tear-gas shells to control the situation.

The protesters torched a state-run bus at Parivartan Chowk, close to the district magistrate's office, and set on fire a police post in Satkhanda area.

Another police post was damaged in old Lucknow's Madeyganj, where police fired tear-gas shells after protesters smashed vehicles parked outside a police post. About 20 people were taken into custody.

When protesters in other parts of Lucknow hurled stones at police, they were lathicharged. In several areas, including Hasanganj, policemen had a tough time tackling the protesters, who adopted a hit-and-run tactic, officials said. A few policemen were injured in the violence.

At Parivartan Chowk, which appeared to be the epicentre of the agitation, policemen faced brickbats and the van of a television crew was damaged. Smoke was billowing out of the vehicle.

The gates of the nearby KD Singh metro station were shut to keep protesters from gathering at Parivartan Chowk.

The violence against the amended law led to panic among residents and forced traders in many markets, including the busy Hazratganj area, to shut their shops.

TV footage from different parts in the capital showed large areas strewn with brickbats, bearing the signs of the clashes between the police and the agitators. Many stone-pelters had their faces covered with masks or handkerchiefs.

Divisional Commissioner Mukesh Meshram said officials were scanning CCTV footage to identify those who damaged property.

"We will ensure that those who damaged property compensate for the loss," he said.

Taking a strong note of the violence, Chief Minister Yogi Adityanath warned his government will exact "badla" (revenge) on those involved in damaging public assets by "auctioning" their properties to compensate for the loss.

"There is no place for violence in democracy. In the name of opposing CAA, Congress, SP and Left parties have pushed the entire country into the fire. There was violence in Lucknow and Sambahal and we will deal with it strictly. All properties of those involved in damaging public assets will be seized and auctioned to compensate for the loss," Adityanath said.

UP government spokesperson and senior minister Shrikant Sharma said it was "highly unfortunate" that the opposition parties were "misleading" people, particularly the students, and urged them to cease doing so.

Prohibitory orders clamped in Bengaluru under section 144 of the CrPC that bans assembly of more than four people had no effect as people in large numbers came out onto the streets opposing the Citizenship Amendment Act (CAA) and the National Register of Citizens (NRC).

Sensing deterioration of the law and order situation, district authorities in Bengaluru, Mysuru, Kalaburagi, Mangaluru, Belagavi, Hubballi, Shivamogga, Hassan, Chikkamagaluru and Chikkaballapura imposed section 144 for the next three days starting from Thursday.

Police had made elaborate arrangements to enforce the ban order but to no avail as demonstrators started thronging important locations of various cities to take part in the protests. In Bengaluru, demonstrations took place at the Town Hall where, among others, historian Ramachandra Guha participated.

While he was protesting with a placard, which read "CAA is against the constitution", policemen held him by his hand and took him away from the venue in a government bus kept reserved only to take away the protesters. He was later released.

Soon after his arrest, people in hundreds swarmed the Town Hall. Buses parked near the venue by police to take away the protesters proved insufficient. Police personnel were seen persuading the protesters to withdraw their protests but it did not have any effect as more and more people started crowding the venue, resulting in a traffic jam.

Long traffic snarls were witnessed in many parts of the Central Business District as a cascading effect of the protests at the Town Hall. Holding placards and waving the tricolour, protesters raised slogans such as 'Hum Le Ke Rahenge Azadi' and 'Withdraw CAA and NRC' and 'CAA is against constitution.'

Similar demonstrations took place at Hubballi, Kalaburagi, Hassan and Shivamogga too. Following the protests, Chief Minister B S Yediyurappa asserted that protecting the interests of Muslims was the State government's responsibility.

His statement came a day after he declared that his government will '100 per cent' implement the CAA. "I appeal to the minority Muslim brothers, this law will in no way affect you, protecting your interest is our responsibility. Kindly cooperate, maintain peace and order," Yediyurappa said.

Speaking to reporters here, he said, "we have not given permission for any agitation in favour or against the law, and section 144 (prohibitory orders) were in place." Alleging that the Congress was behind the protest, Yediyurappa said "it is because of people like U T Khader (Congress MLA) such things are happening, and if they continue in the same way, they will have to face the consequences.

Khader recently claimed that the state would "blow up in cinders" if the Yediyurappa government tried to implement the Citizenship Amendment Act. Yediyurappa even expressed surprise over Guha's detention and said he has instructed police to exercise restraint against the agitators.

As the situation in various parts of the state turned grim, former chief minister Siddaramaiah hit out at Yediyurappa for clamping down on the protests. He reminded how the protests intensified during British India due to the suppression. "Be it Mahatma Gandhi or Bhagat Singh, Nehru or Sardar Patel, all the freedom fighters, along with many people, protested to fight for Independence, inspite of British regressive police actions.

More the policing, Stronger the Protest!! History is a great Teacher!! the former chief minister tweeted. The Congress veteran even cautioned Yediyurappa to stand guard against the fascist forces using him as a pawn.

"Mr Yediyurappa, you are being used as a pawn to fulfill the agenda of RSS. You are falling to their trap. They're coming for you!! Be aware, Be watchful!! Strengthen the forces that fight against fascism!! he said in another tweet.

Congress state president Dinesh Gundu Rao too slammed the BJP. "Yesterday: Sec 144; Today: arrest of law abiding citizens; Tomorrow: suspend internet services; Day after: house arrest activists & political leaders.

Life in a Fascist regime under Modi-Shah," he tweeted. Congress sources said the party's Rajya Sabha member Rajeev Gowda and MLA Sowmya Reddy have filed a petition in the Karnataka High Court against imposing section 144 in Karnataka, especially in Bengaluru.

Biocon chairman and managing director Kiran Mazumdar Shaw too expressed shock over Guha's arrest. "This is shocking n (sic) reflects the total lack of understanding of fundamental freedom to express dissent — a peaceful protest shd not be mishandled in this manner," she tweeted.

In Gujarat, the police have used tear gas against protestors in Shah Alam area of Ahmedabad, after some police vehicles were vandalised.

A curfew has been announced in five police station limits of the Mangaluru Commissionerate until midnight on December 21, A

In Mumbai, thousands of protesters took to the streets of the financial capital against the Citizenship Act on Thursday, converging at the August Kranti Maidan, where Mahatma Gandhi in 1942 told the British to quit India.

The gathering included workers of political parties, students and a smattering of Bollywood personalities, who made out a strong case against the Act and the National Register of Citizens (NRC).

Despite it being a work day, the protestors began trickling in from all the corners this afternoon to the ground in south Mumbai, from where the Mahatma had given the clarion call of Quit India against the colonial British rule.

Protests have engulfed Delhi, parts of the north eastern states, especially Assam, spreading to other parts in the country where students and others have been relentlessly agitating against CAA and NRC (National Register of Citizens).

Protesters say the CAA is communal and discriminates against the followers of Islam.

The protest in Mumbai was called by a slew of opposition parties like the CPI and civil society groups, but the gathering seemed to transcend all identities.

Students from Assam, a few Mumbaikars hailing from Mizoram and others joined the locals in the protests that began at 4 pm and dwarfed a pro-CAA gathering organised outside the Churchgate railway station not far away.

Bollywood personalities including actors Farhan Akhtar, Sushant Singh, Swara Bhaskar and film makers Rakeysh Omprakash Mehra and Saeed Mirza were also present at the Maidan.

Addressing the gathering, Mirza said the time has come for Indians to choose between the ideas espoused by RSS founder Golwalkar and B R Ambedkar, and between Mahatma Gandhi and his killer Nathuram Godse.

Picking up from Modis controversial statement on identifying a protester from clothing, Ayesha, a student leader from the Tata Institute of Social Sciences here said one can identify a communal person from the khaki shorts and white shirt worn by Godse.

Award-winning film maker Anand Patwardhan, senior BJP leader L K Advani's former aide Sudheendra Kulkarni and activist Teesta Setalvad were also present.

But it was the common people, and the wit that dripped from their specially made placards that stole the show.

Most of the humour was targeted at the PM and Home Minister Amit Shah.

Throwing their wrists in the air with slogans like Modi Shah se azaadi and with anger in their voice, the protesters marched towards the Maidan in Grant Road.

Noted freedom fighter G G Parikh, 94, who participated in the Quit India movement in 1942, was present at the Maidan.

Also in attendance were politicians Raj Babbar, Hussain Dalwai and Milind Deora.

College students, IT professionals and members of various communities also participated in the protest.

Protesters shouted slogans against Prime Minister Narendra Modi and Home Minister Amit Shah. "Tanashahi nahi chalegi (dictatorship won't work)," they said.

Thousands of students from various parts of the city, members of various communities and political parties were seen marching towards the Maidan carrying placards, banners and handbills in their hands.

Some of the placards read "Hindu-Muslim ek hain, Modi Shah fake hain, "Sab taj uchhale jayenge, sab takht giraye jayenge", "Kisi ke baap ka Hindustan thodi hain" and "Stop dividing India".

Similar protests were held in Pune, Nagpur and various other cities in Maharashtra.

Members of Muslim community organised anti-CAA protests in Malegaon in Nashik district and at Paratwada in Amravati distrit.

In Jalgaon, Left parties held a protest march to the district collectorate to oppose the Act. A morcha was held in Aurangabad against the Act. Anti-CAA protests were also held in Kolhapur and Osmanabad.

The ABVP held pro-CAA marches in Pune and Aurangabad.

A similar protest in favour of the Act was held at Churchagte in Mumbai.

The Mumbai Traffic Police advised commuters to take alternate routes and diversions around August Kranti Maidan and issued traffic restrictions from Nana Chowk and Kemps Corner.
