Kashmir crisis: Pakistan’s moderates threatening nuclear war over disputed region

Pakistan military test nuclear capable Shaheen-I ballistic missile

top stories direct to your inbox SUBSCRIBE Invalid email Sign up to receive our rundown of the day'sdirect to your inbox We use your sign-up to provide content in ways you've consented to and to improve our understanding of you. This may include adverts from us and 3rd parties based on our understanding. You can unsubscribe at any time. More info

Ashraf Jehangir Qazi, a moderate in the Pakistani establishment and former ambassador to India, China and the US, is threatening nuclear war in support of Kashmir’s secessionists. Mr Qazi has suggested his country should hit back at India with weapons of mass destruction if to does not soften its stance on the disputed Himalayan region which was stripped of its semi-autonomous status and demoted from a state into a federal territory last summer.

If the people of Kashmir are threatened with genocide, Pakistan’s deterrent must cover them Ashraf Jehangir Qazi

He said: “Pakistan’s nuclear deterrent is meant to deter war not pursue war. “But if the people of Kashmir are threatened with genocide, as indeed they are, Pakistan’s deterrent must cover them.” It is not the first time Pakistani officials have spoken openly about the nuclear option to settle the Kashmir row.

Indian paramilitary troops on patrol in Kashmir

Prime Minister Imran Khan stunned the UN General Assembly earlier this year when he urged the global community to act on Kashmir. He said: “If the world does nothing to stop the Indian assault on Kashmir and its people, there will be consequences for the whole world as two nuclear-armed states get ever closer to a direct military confrontation.” Pakistan’s sabre-rattling sparked a similarly aggressive response from Delhi with Defence Minister Rajnath Singh questioning India’s nuclear policy of “No First Use”. READ MORE:India-Pakistan: Devastating impact of ‘suicidal’ nuclear war revealed

Fears are growing of nuclear conflict between Pakistan and India

India and Pakistan have gone to war twice overKashmir

He said: “The future of India’s No First Use policy on nuclear weapons depends on circumstances.” Growing fears of conflict come amid an ongoing crackdown in Muslim-majority Kashmir. Pakistani foreign minister Shah Mahmood Qureshi has written another letter to the UN Secretary General, claiming that India has deployed and tested several types of missiles and could launch an attack against his country.

Trending

A foreign ministry spokesman said Mr Qureshi had “appraised the UN Security Council and the UN Secretary General on Indian actions that continue to escalate tensions in an already tense environment in South Asia”. Mr Qureshi also warned India could launch “false flag” attack on Pakistan to divert the world’s attention from the “grave situation” in Kashmir. India’s army chief, General Bipin Rawat, said the situation along the Kashmir LoC “can escalate any time” and accused Pakistan of fuelling the tensions. He said: “The army is maintaining a high level of operational readiness, with detailed plans chalked out to cater for different contingencies.” DON'T MISS

WW3: Nuclear war between India and Pakistan could cost UK £20BILLION[ANALYSIS]

Kashmir fury puts Modi on brink as India leader suffers election blow[SPOTLIGHT]

India vs Pakistan: Nuclear war risk grows, warns defence expert[FOCUS]

Both sides have threatened to use nuclear weapons in the dispute
