CAA protests: ‘Godhra-like situation’ in state if majority lose patience, warns Karnataka Minister CT Ravi

Karnataka Minister CT Ravi honouring PM Narendra Modi in Mysuru tradition | Photo Credit: Twitter

Key Highlights Karnataka will be blown up into cinders if Citizenship Act is implemented: Congress leader UT Khader Public has no freedom to discuss, raise their voice against anything in the state: DK Shivakumar Congress leader and former CM Siddaramaiah has been stopped from entering Mangaluru

Bengaluru: Days after Congress leader UT Khader said that Karnataka will be blown up into cinders if Citizenship Act is implemented, state minister CT Ravi said that Godhra-like situation may arise if the majority loses patience.

Khader had earlier said that the while the country is in flames Karnataka has remained an island of peace.

“I am warning Karnataka CM that if you implement Citizenship Act here then I swear Karnataka will be blown up into cinders,” he had said.

CT Ravi,Karnataka Min on Congress's UT Khader: Ppl with such mentality had set fire in Godhra&killed Karsevakas.Hope he remembers what answer was given.If he doesn't,he can recall it.Majority is very patient,pls look back&see what happens when patience of majority runs out(19.12) pic.twitter.com/r9vyZIoxI5 — ANI (@ANI) December 21, 2019

Blasting Khader for his comment Ravi said that people with such mentality had set fire in Godhra and killed Karsevakas.

“Hope he remembers what answer was given. If he doesn't, he can recall it. The majority is very patient, please look back and see what happens when the patience of the majority runs out,” said Ravi.

Meanwhile, Congress leader DK Shivakumar slammed Chief Minister BS Yediyurappa over the incident of violence in the protest against the Citizenship Amendment Act in the state. He further questioned Yediyurappa over implementing section 144 in the state.

“Public has no freedom to discuss, raise their voice against anything in the state, this shows your arrogance and proves that you are trying to snatch the freedom of speech and expression from the public,” he said.

Earlier, Karnataka Home Minister Basavaraj Bommai blamed people coming from the neighbouring states for the violence in the state against the new citizenship law.

Protests against the Citizenship (Amendment) Act, 2019, had broken out in the state capital on Thursday leading to the death of two persons. Around 20 police personnel were also injured in the violence that followed during another protest in Mangaluru.

Former Chief Minister Siddaramaiah was stopped from entering Mangaluru with Police Commissioner issuing him notice stating that “his entry in the city may lead to law and order situation.”

Protests across the country against the CAA intensified after the Parliament gave the nod to the Citizenship (Amendment) Bill, 2019.
