CAA protests in India: Hospitals list 10 dead in UP protests, cops count 6, say they didn’t fire a single shot

Ten people were killed and scores of others injured as protests against the new citizenship law turned violent in UP for the second consecutive day on Friday, taking the death toll in the state in the last 48 hours to 11. UP DGP OP Singh reiterated that police had not fired a single bullet even as several of the deceased and injured, including cops, had gunshot injuries.

Anti-CAA protests continue in UP, 12 police vehicles torched in Firozabad

Eleven people were killed and scores of others injured as protests against the new citizenship law turned violent in Uttar Pradesh for the second consecutive day on Friday, taking the death toll in the state in the last 48 hours to 11.While TOI confirmed these deaths from hospitals in the respective districts, additional DGP PV Ramashastry emphasised that only six deaths had taken place. UP DGP O P Singh reiterated that police had not fired a single bullet even as several of the deceased and injured, including cops, had gunshot injuries.Stray incidents of violence were also reported from Vadodara and Jabalpur, even as the ongoing protests in the rest of the country grew stronger, spread to newer areas and were largely peaceful. Authorities in many cities and districts imposed internet curfew and clamped prohibitory orders.In UP, internet was snapped in 21 districts, including Varanasi and Lucknow. The violence, which had claimed one life in Lucknow on Thursday, spread to newer areas as pitched battles were fought in many cities between police and protesters, who defied prohibitory orders.Meerut was the worst affected with Meerut Medical College confirming four deaths. Two deaths were reported from Bijnor and one each from Muzaffarnagar, Firozabad, Sambhal and Kanpur. However, Lucknow remained peaceful.As many as 200 people were arrested and 3,305 detained for defying prohibitory orders, Ramashastry said.Meanwhile in Aurangabad, Maharashtra, the city police enforced Section 144 of CrPC for an unusually long period of 72 days beginning Saturday, after nearly one lakh people turned up on Friday for anti-CAA protests.Protesters in UP remained undeterred in many places despite the cops using teargas shells and batons to disperse the crowds. Several police vehicles were vandalised or torched in Amroha, Bijnor, Muzaffarnagar, Bulandshahr and Hapur while self-imposed curfew could be witnessed in many cities as shopkeepers kept their shutters down.The UP government has ordered closure of all schools, colleges and universities on Saturday. Schools were already closed on Thursday and Friday due to extreme cold weather. Prohibitory orders are in place in the entire state.Senior officials said internet services will be restored by respective authorities in the 21 districts only after a review of the situation on Saturday evening. These districts are Lucknow, Kanpur, Allahabad, Agra, Aligarh, Ghaziabad, Varanasi, Mathura, Meerut, Moradabad, Muzaffarnagar, Bareilly, Firozadad, Pilibhit, Rampur, Saharanpur, Shamli, Sambhal, Amroha, Mau and Azamgarh.Stone pelting in Meerut continued for hours during the day and intensified despite paramilitary forces rushing to the affected areas to push back the rioters. In the evening, the retreating mob attacked Islamabad police outpost and torched several vehicles kept there. SSP Meerut Ajay Sahni said 12 people have been arrested for the arson and additional police force has been deployed at all sensitive spots.In Varanasi, at least eight people, including a 10-year-old boy, were injured in a stampede after police lathicharged protesters in retaliation of heavy stone pelting. SSP Varanasi Prabhakar Chaudhary said the boy is on life support.In Madhya Pradesh’s Jabalpur, curfew was imposed in four police station areas after protests turned violent when thousands defied prohibitory orders and attacked cops. At least 13 cops were injured in the brick-batting. In Bhopal, too, about 10,000 people defied Section 144, but the protest was peaceful. Schools will remain shut in the two cities on Saturday.In Gujarat, heavy stone pelting and vandalism broke out in Vadodara’s Hathikhana area, forcing the police to fire two rounds in the air and lob 30 tear gas shells to disperse a rampaging mob. At least three policemen, including an assistant commissioner of police, were injured while three police vehicles were damaged.Vadodara police commissioner Anupam Singh Gahlaut said the trouble started when some people objected to a police videographer shooting the crowd that was coming out of Hathikhana Panch Muslim Masjid after the Friday namaz.Mangaluru, which was put under curfew after witnessing two deaths on Thursday in police firing, remained largely peaceful on Friday. Curfew in the city will remain till the midnight of Sunday. Internet remains snapped in the city.Protests against CAA spread to different parts of Maharashtra on Friday, with nearly one lakh people turning up for a rally outside the Aurangabad district collectorate. While this rally was peaceful, police had to resort to lathicharge in Beed and Parbhani.In Pune, more than 12,000 people walked in a peaceful rally while 2,000 protesters gathered at Ambedkar Chowk in Pimpri. In Kolhapur, where police have already issued prohibitory orders from Thursday, around 100 people organised a protest at the Kolhapur district collectorate.
