First National Population Register, then National Register of Citizens

The nationwide National Register of Citizens () will be notified after the Registrar General of India (RGI) updates the National Population Register ( NPR ), officials said, citing provisions of the Citizenship Act.During his reply in the Lok Sabha on the Citizenship Amendment Bill last week, Union home minister Amit Shah said the government would soon bring in NRC, leading to protests across the country. According to an order issued by RGI on July 31, the population register is being compiled for the entire country, except Assam. “Information relating to all persons who are usually residing within the jurisdiction of local registrar shall be undertaken between April 1, 2020, to September 30, 2020,” states the communication, signed by Registrar General Vivek Joshi.NPR is a register of usual residents of the country. It is being prepared at the local (village/sub-town), subdistrict, district, state and national level under provisions of the Citizenship Act, 1955 and the Citizenship (Registration of Citizens and Issue of National Identity Cards) Rules, 2003. A usual resident is defined, for the purposes of NPR, as a person who has resided in a local area for the past six months or more, or a person who intends to reside in that area for the next six months or more. The law compulsorily seeks to register every citizen of India and issue a national identity card.A home ministry official further clarified that states cannot stall the process of NPR. “It is backed by an Act. The guidelines or SOPs for nationwide NRC has not been finalised yet, therefore there is no need to panic. The process of conducting NRC is explained in the 1955 Act, according to which citizenship of India can be acquired by birth, descent, registration, naturalisation or incorporation of territory,” the official said. Later, a home ministry spokesperson said in a series of tweets that, “Indian citizens do not have to prove any ancestry by presenting documents like identity cards, birth certificates etc of parents/grandparents dating back to pre-1971 situation. Citizenship of India may be proved by giving any document relating to date of birth or place of birth or both.” The authorities may allow those illiterate citizens who do not have any documents to produce witnesses or local proofs supported by members of the community.
