Sarbananda Sonowal insulted people, says AIUDF

The CM said the number of people who will get citizenship would be known only after implementation of the Act

“The chief minister said they were not aware how many people would get citizenship and the number would be known only after implementation of the Act. By saying that, he has disrespected the people of Assam who are hitting the streets everyday against the divisive and contentious act,” general secretary of the AIUDF, Champak Kalita, said here in a news conference.

The All India United Democratic Front (AIUDF) on Saturday said Assam chief minister Sarbananda Sonowal had insulted the people of Assam by saying that the Citizenship (Amendment) Act would be implemented amid the massive anti-CAA protests.

On Friday, Sonowal did not spell out his stand at a press briefing, but stressed on allaying the fear that the Act would open the floodgates for Bangladeshis to apply for citizenship as feared by the protesters. “Through this law only persecuted people, already living among us for decades, can apply for citizenship. No new people will come. Their number will be small. Assam will always remain with the Assamese. Nobody from Bangladesh can come today and apply for citizenship. There will be no threat to Assamese society,” he had assured.

Kalita said Sonowal had also insulted the 860 martyrs of Assam Movement. “The amended Act violates the historic Assam Accord and the Centre is trying to amend it. We want to make it clear that no one can rewrite the Assam Accord. The AIUDF will vehemently oppose anything which may violate the Accord,” Kalita said.

The AIUDF also demanded release of Krishak Mukti Sangram Samiti (KMSS) leader Akhil Gogoi and pro-talks Ulfa leader Jiten Dutta. Akhil’s 80-year-old mother is on an indefinite fast demanding his release.

Kalita alleged that cabinet minister Himanta Biswa Sarma had targeted a particular community and tried to give the spontaneous movement a communal colour.

“The government has targeted a particular community for the unrest due to the anti-CAB protests. Sarma is trying to divert the movement and is intimidating the community by targeting them. He tried to give a communal colour to stop the protests. Why was Sarma holding a news conference though he is not even the home minister and why did he hold the press conference like an investigative officer?” Kalita asked.

Sarma on Tuesday evening accused the Popular Front of India, an offshoot of the banned SIMI, Urban Naxals and a section of Congress workers, of being involved in the violence in front of Janata Bhawan, the seat of power in Assam. The AIUDF said they did not support any kind of violence and protests should be done in a democratic way.
