Thousands protest against Citizenship Act in districts

Most women, sporting gamosas, raised their hands in unison, reaffirming their resolve to fight the law. They also sang Bhupen Hazarika’s Manuhe manuhar babe (people for people) in protest against CAA.

Age was no bar as women, some accompanied by their children, came out across Assam on Saturday to unitedly oppose the Citizenship (Amendment) Act.

Slogans like “Joi Aai Axom (glory to Assam)” and “CAA aami namanu” (I will not accept CAA)” rent the air as the protesters demanded that the government roll back the “contentious law”.

Jamuna Bala Dutta, 86, said: “We will oppose CAA because we have burdened ourselves with illegal migrants for too long. Will they impose everybody on Assam? We will ensure scrapping of the act even if we have to sacrifice our lives. We have come out because we must protect our future generations. The government must scrap the Act. They must listen to the Assamese people.”

Similar protests were also held in Sivasagar, Dibrugarh, Moran, Demow, Tinsukia, Kaliabor and Dhemaji, among others.

In the city, apart from the rally organised by All Assam Students’ Union (AASU) and others at Latasil field, the Guwahati Women’s Collective also organised a protest meeting.

Carrying placards, hundreds of protesters marched from Guwahati Club to Dighalipukhuri.

Some of the slogans on the placards read, “No to Hindu Rashtra”, “Long Live Revolution”, “Repeal CAA”, “Women Resist in Black”, “Uphold our constitutional rights”, “You can fool some people some of the time, but you can’t fool all the people all the time”, “No CAA”, “Release Akhil Gogoi”, “CAB will make the locals minority” and “CAB will destroy the language, culture”.

Sahitya Akademi awardee Nirupama Borgohain said, “We will never allow the plan to convert our secular country into a Hindu Rashtra.”

Another protester, Pooja Nirala, said the act has violated the Assam Accord, which sets the cut-off of March 24, 1971, for detection and deportation of illegal immigrants. According to the amended citizenship law, persecuted non-Muslims who entered India from Bangladesh, Pakistan and Afghanistan till December 31, 2014, will be eligible for citizenship.

“The way people have come out spontaneously in protest speaks volumes of the pain they are suffering owing to the imposition of the amended citizenship law,” said Anindita Deka, another protester.

AASU president Dipanka Kumar Nath told The Telegraph that the Narendra Modi-led BJP government had damaged Assam more than the earlier Congress government. “Through the Assam Accord we have on behalf of the country already taken the burden of illegal foreigners on our small state. Because of CAA now, we cannot take the additional burden till December 2014 The Assam government has failed to understand the emotion and sentiments of Assamese people, who are vehemently opposing the act. The government has surrendered to the Centre but the people of Assam will not accept CAA under any circumstances,” Nath said.
