CAApital on edge: Jamia students continue stir, police arrest 15; more detentions likely

A day after violence broke out in Daryaganj over the Citizenship Amendment Act (CAA), Delhi Police have arrested 15 persons.

The arrested persons have been charged with rioting and using force to deter policemen from doing duty. According to the police, the protesters had set ablaze a private car parked at Daryaganj on Friday evening. Police personnel doused the fire immediately.

A total of 42 people were detained at Daryaganj police station on Friday. Other than the 18 minors, the remaining detainees are between 20-38 years old. Some 30-35 persons were detained at Seemapuri police station; eight minors out of them were released early on Saturday.

Ten of the arrested persons were among those detained, police said, adding that there is a chance of more arrests in connection with the violence. A 14-year-old boy was one of 18 minors detained by cops after lathicharge and water cannons were used on a crowd protesting against the CAA in the area. He was later released by the Daryaganj Police. His clothes were soaked in blood, and he suffered a severe head injury.

His medical report, in possession of Mail Today, specifies that the injuries were sustained "during the protest at Delhi Gate". The boy told Mail Today that he was thrashed and abused inside the lock-up as well. Several others who were detained also sustained serious injuries. On Saturday, Jamia Millia Islamia students staged a demonstration outside the varsity campus against the CAA.

Protesters hold placards as they raise slogans during a demonstration against the Citizenship Amendment Act at Rajghat in Delhi on Saturday. (Photo: Qamar Sibtain)

The protest, started by woman students of the varsity, was later joined by its male students as well as alumni and "outsiders", with the protesters chanting slogans like "lad ke lenge azadi" (will fight for our independence) and "Inquilab Zindabad".

Participating in the protest, 76-year-old Nafiz Ikram said, "You all are leading a movement against what is wrong. Don't step back. Don't get scared of police. You are the real police who are fighting to protect our Constitution."

A protester asked, "The rich have proof of their identities, or they will procure it somehow? How will the labourers and workers from Uttar Pradesh and Bihar manage to get the proof?" The protester came from Bihar to join the protest.

Meanwhile, hundreds of students, professionals, and activists gathered at the India Gate in Delhi on Saturday to protest against the CAA. The protesters raised slogans against the BJP government and said the new law will tear into the secular fabric of the country.

(Inputs from PTI)
