India Could Launch False Flag Operation To Divert Attention From Domestic Situation: Imran Khan

New Delhi:

Pakistan Prime Minister Imran Khan on Saturday claimed that India could carry out a “false flag operation” against it to divert attention from its domestic situation. This came after protests against the amended Citizenship Law intensified across the country. In a series of tweets, Khan said, under the Modi government, India has been moving towards “Hindu Rashtra” with its “fascist ideology”.

“...Now with the Citizens Amendment Act, all those Indians who want a pluralist India are beginning to protest & it is becoming a mass movement,” Khan said on the massive protests in India (sic).

Prime minister Khan had criticised the amended citizenship law and said it "violates all norms of international human rights law and bilateral agreements with Pakistan" and that "it is part of the RSS Hindu Rashtra design of expansionism."

According to the amended Act, members of Hindu, Sikh, Buddhist, Jain, Parsi and Christian communities who have come from Pakistan, Bangladesh and Afghanistan till December 31, 2014 and face religious persecution there will not be treated as illegal immigrants but given Indian citizenship. President Ram Nath Kovind had given assent to the Citizenship (Amendment) Bill, 2019, turning it into an Act.

Khan said that as the protests in India are increasing, “threat to Pakistan from India is also increasing” and the Indian Army chief General Bipin Rawat’s remarks on the situation along the Line of Control adds to Pakistan’s “concerns of a false flag operation”.

General Rawat on Wednesday said that the situation along the Line of Control in Jammu and Kashmir can escalate any time. General Rawat's remarks came in the backdrop of spurt in ceasefire violation by Pakistan along the LoC in Jammu and Kashmir since the abrogation of Article 370 in August.

"The situation along the Line of Control can escalate any time. We have to be prepared for escalatory matrix," Rawat said.

Union Minister of State for Home G Kishan Reddy had told Lok Sabha last month that "950 incidents of ceasefire violation along the LoC from across the border in Jammu and Kashmir were reported during August 2019 to October 2019".

For all the Latest World News, Download News Nation Android and iOS Mobile Apps.
