After CAA protests, Mangaluru MLA UT Khader charged with sedition for protest speech

MANGALURU: Former minister and Mangaluru MLA UT Khader was booked on Thursday for allegedly making a provocative speech at a protest against the Citizenship (Amendment) Act.During a protest organised by the District Congress Committee near the deputy commissioner’s office on December 17, Khader had opposed implementation of CAA in the state. BJP Dakshina Kannada District Yuva Morcha general secretary Sandesh Kumar Shetty filed a complaint on Thursday (December 19), alleging that Khader had provoked people. “MLA UT Khader has incited people to indulge in criminal activities through his statement that Karnataka will burn if CAA is implemented in the state. Being a responsible people’s representative, Khader has made provocative speech to make people revolt against the government and thereby destroy public properties and threaten lives of people,” Shetty said in his complaint.Based on the complaint, Mangaluru South police registered a case under Sections 124 A (Sedition), 153 A (Promoting enmity between different groups on grounds of religion, race, place of birth, residence, language, etc., and doing acts prejudicial to maintenance of harmony) and 153 (Wantonly giving provocation with intent to cause riot).On Saturday, Khader said he had not made any provocative statements during the protest. He alleged that his advice and warning to the government against implementation of CAA and NRC had been misunderstood. He said the government should make it clear how the citizenship law will be implemented. “Let the government deny citizenship to people from Pakistan, Bangladesh and Afghanistan. We have no objection to it. However, let them not bring religion into the law,” Khader said.He added that the government has failed to control the law & order situation in Mangaluru. “They have failed to fulfil their duties and are now blaming me for their mistake. They (BJP) are following Goebbels’ propaganda technique to make people believe their lies. I’ve spoken about apprehensions of bonafide citizens of the nation,” Khader said.
