Dwarka e-way, NH-48 connection blocked again

Iron grills erected to stop commuters from bypassing Kherki Daula toll plaza

More than a fortnight after a wall blocking connectivity between the Dwarka Expressway and the National Highway-48 was demolished at Chief Minister Manohar Lal Khattar’s instance, iron grills were fixed on Friday in the wake of the Delhi High Court order to prevent vehicles from bypassing the Kherki Daula toll plaza.

Firm moves HC

Chief Executive Officer of Millennium City Expressway Private Ltd S. Raghuraman said they moved the Delhi High Court on January 28 following the demolition of the wall by the district administration with a plea pointing out that the connectivity between Dwarka Expressway and NH-48 would cause leakage of traffic at the toll plaza and revenue loss to the firm. The firm argued that it could also cause collision of vehicles and lead to traffic-related issues.

The court directed temporary barricading at the junction till the next hearing in the case on February 19.

Following the court order, the district administration appointed a duty Magistrate to erect temporary structure at a junction near the Kherki Daula toll plaza and the iron grills were fixed in the presence of the police.

Residents affected

DXP Welfare Association general secretary Pradip Rahi said connecting the Dwarka Expressway with NH-48 would have benefitted around 35,000 families residing on condominiums along the Expressway. Mr. Rahi said that around 1.5 lakh families had invested their hard earned money to buy flats on the Dwarka Expressway in hope of better connectivity and quality life free from pollution. But the blockade raised at the highway had defeated both the purposes.

“The families staying along the Dwarka Expressway will now be forced to wait for 15-20 minutes daily at the toll gate amid pollution. It is a sheer wastage of time . It is shocking that despite the Chief Minister’s orders, the barricading has been done,” said Mr. Rahi.

He added that the residents along the Dwarka Expressway and the villagers would soon plan a protest against it.
