Citizenship law, NRC have nothing to do with Indian Muslims, rivals stoking violence: PM

New Delhi:, dec 22

Accusing the opposition of pursuing “divide and rule politics” and stoking violence over the amended citizenship law, Prime Minister Narendra Modi asserted on Sunday that the legislation and the NRC have nothing to do with Indian Muslims as he sought to assuage their concerns amid widespread protests. Strongly defending the contentious law, he said at a rally here that it is about giving rights to persecuted minorities from neighbouring countries and does not snatch anybody’s rights, as he made an appeal for peace.”The citizenship law or the NRC has nothing to do with Indian Muslims. They have nothing to worry,” he said, accusing the Congress, its allies and “urban naxals” of spreading rumour that Muslims will be sent to detention centres. The law has, in fact, nothing to do with Indian citizens, he said and asked people to stand up to pay tribute to Parliament and lawmakers for its passage.Modi used the big rally, held to “thank him” for the Centre’s decision to give ownership rights to residents of unauthorised colonies in poll-bound Delhi, to counter criticism over the Citizenship Amendment Act as he condemned incidents of violence during the protests, lauded the police and slammed Pakistan for discrimination against minorities. In a relentless attack on the opposition during his nearly 100-minute speech, he said it was still reeling from the shock of his return to power in June and is resorting to divide and rule politics to target him. Targeting the Congress, AAP, TMC and the Left, he said India had an opportunity to expose Pakistan’s discrimination against minorities but it was lost due to their politics and accused these parties of working to “defame” India globally.

Starting his speech with the slogan of ‘vividhta me ekta, Bharat ki visheshta’ (Unity in diversity is India’s speciality), he said his government never considered whether beneficiaries of its schemes went to temple or mosque. He asked Muslims to look at his “track record” and not listen to “tape record” of his rivals.”Did we ask anybody’s religion or caste when our government gave LPG cylinders to eight crore families? We never asked people’s religion when giving homes to the poor during the last five years.”I want to ask from the Congress, its allies and others who are dividing the country over the issue as to why they are resorting to such lies…. They have conspired to push not only Delhi but also other parts of the country into chaos and fear,” he said, asking youths to read the law’s provisions. He also hit out at the chief ministers who have claimed that they will not implement the amended citizenship law in their states, saying they should have first consulted their legal officers. The central government has maintained that the Constitution makes it binding on states to implement the law passed by Parliament. In a clear justification of having a nationwide National Register of Citizens, Modi said infiltrators never “reveal” themselves unlike refugees who never “hide” their identities. Modi, however, made it clear that the contentious issue has not been discussed by his government in either Cabinet or Parliament, and noted that it has been carried out only in Assam so far following the apex court’s order. The prime minister said lies were being spread about the NRC. Speaking against violence during the recent anti-CAA protests, he accused the opposition of not making any appeal for peace and said their “silence” showed their indirect support to vandalism targeting school buses and trains. Praising the police, which has faced criticism from some quarters for allegedly using excessive force against protestors, the prime minister said they have always helped people and noted that over 33,000 of them have sacrificed their lives in duty since independence .Police did not rescue people from Anaj Mandi fire by asking their religion, he said. Several protesters in states like Uttar Pradesh, Karnataka and Assam have died in alleged police firing. Modi said his rivals can burn his effigy and thrash it with shoes if they wish so,

but they should not target the assets of the poor. He also quoted comments of former prime minister Manmohan Singh and Rajasthan Chief Minister Ashok Gehlot in support of giving citizenship rights to these persecuted minorities and said the Congress changed its stand due to vote bank politics. Quoting Mahatma Gandhi as saying that India should give shelter to persecuted Hindus and Sikhs from Pakistan, the prime minister said the law is in line with his sentiments .Those who try to benefit from ‘Gandhi’ surname should read what he had said, Modi said in a clear dig at the ruling family of the Congress. Opposition parties do not want to distinguish between infiltrators and those who took refuge in India due to persecution, he said. Modi spoke about the “support” he had received from Muslim countries and the highest civilian honour bestowed on him by many of them to assert that it has “scared” the Congress and its friends.”They are worried if Muslims across the world support me so much, then how long they can frighten Indian Muslims (against me),” he said. India’s relations with Bangladesh had deepened under his government, Modi said. Modi said everything is being done to remove him by his rivals, adding that efforts have been made for over 20 years to target him but these never succeeded.

The Prime Minister said that “Some dalit leaders, too, have entered the muddle without even understanding. They need to understand that the refugees who have come from Pakistan are mostly dalits. These dalit people were employed as bonded labor in Pakistan. Girls are religiously converted and forced to marry in Pakistan. It is well-documented. It only happens because they follow a different religion. These people have come to India only due to such religious persecution.”

The Prime Minister also spoke about different initiatives of the Central government and said that his government has strived to reach every poor’s house and helped all citizens through Ujjwala, Awas Yojana and free electricity schemes.”We never asked for anyone’s religion. Why are we being questioned then,” he said.

He also talked about the beginning of National Register of Citizen (NRC) exercise and stated that the idea was introduced by the Congress during its rule. “The NRC came at the time of Congress. Were they sleeping then? We neither brought the NRC in the Cabinet nor in Parliament. If we are passing legislation to give you ownership rights, in the same session will we bring legislation to send you out,” he said.

Prime Minister Modi also questioned the silence of opposition parties over the issue and questioned the Congress` stand on the ongoing protest in the country. “West Bengal CM Mamata Banerjee reached out to the UN on the issue. A few years ago, she had stood up in the Parliament and asked to stop infiltration from Bangladesh and wanted help for the refugees coming in from Bangladesh.”

“I want to ask Mamata didi, what changed? Why’re you spreading false rumors? Why’re you so afraid? You must believe in the people of WB. Why’re you not trusting the people of your State?, said Modi, while targeting Mamata Banerjee.

“The entire Left front that is left in just small pockets in the country, is opposing this as well. Prakash Karat, their senior leader, had also asked for support for religiously persecuted people coming from Bangladesh. These people have always done vote-bank politics. Everything ever said by them was a lie. They’re agitating people for their votes, spreading violence, and are spreading falsehood and rumors,” he said.

“Congress and its supporters are also disturbed by the fact that why PM Modi is respected in the world and especially, in Muslim countries,” Modi said, targeting the Opposition.

He also took a jibe at Congress leaders for their double standard over the law.

“Congress and its friends, some urban Naxals are spreading rumours that all Muslims will be sent to detention centres. Respect your education. Read what is the Citizenship Amendment Act and NRC. You are educated. Do not fall prey to the rumours of detention-centres being spread by Urban Naxals and Congress. It’s a lie and is dividing the nation,” PM Modi said. He also outlined the difference between an infiltrator and a refugee and said that many infiltrators are coming out and speaking now.

“There is a very simple difference. An infiltrator never reveals his identity and a refugee never hides his identity. Many of these infiltrators are coming out and speaking. Why don’t they speak the truth? They are scared that their reality will come out,” added Modi.

He said most beneficiaries of the amended law were Dalits and took a jibe at Dalit leader Chandra Shekhar Azad over his participation in a protest rally in the old Delhi. Aazad was later arrested. Referring to the protests, Modi said he was pained when he saw stones in hands of protestors but was also comforted when he saw some of them holding the tricolour. “Now that they are carrying the tricolour, they will also speak against those carrying guns or speaking in support of Pakistan-sponsored terrorism,” he said.
