Nearly 25,000 join pro-CAA rally amid nationwide protests

NAGPUR: In a show of strength in support of the controversial Citizenship (Amendment) Act ( CAA ), thousands marched from Yeshwant Stadium to Samvidhan Square in the city on Sunday. Amid chants of ‘Bharat mata ki jai’ and ‘Jai Shri Ram’, the rallyists also raised slogans like ‘Desh ke gaddaro ko, goli maaro saalo ko’.At Samvidhan Square, the rally was addressed by Union minister Nitin Gadkari, godman Govinddeo Giri Maharaj, of Rajasthan, and several others.Amid provocative sloganeering in front of the statue of the architect of the Indian Constitution Babasaheb Ambedkar, some of the speakers also issued veiled threats to anti-CAA protesters saying, “See our strength and stay in limits.”A senior police official said nearly 25,000 citizens participated in the rally, organized by a pro-Hindutva group Lok Adhikar Manch. The manch had brought around 2,000 women and kids, who are enrolled in RSS-controlled schools in Nagpur.Addressing the rallyists, Gadkari said the Act is based on the vision of Mahatma Gandhi, Jawaharlal Nehru and Sardar Patel. “There would be no injustice to the minorities living in the country,” he said.Talking about exclusion of Muslims from the CAA, he said, at the time of Partition, then national leaders like Gandhi, Nehru and Patel had assured India’s support to those who face injustice or persecution in the newly carved out nation (Pakistan) on the basis of religion.“The Constitution drafted by Babasaheb Ambedkar had mentioned that Hindus, Sikhs, Jains, Parsees, Christians from Pakistan and Afghanistan, who return to India, would be granted refugee status. Ambedkar had not included Muslims in the list as it was considered then that those from the community who want to leave Pakistan or Afghanistan have several choices in the form of 100-150 Islamic nations where they can seek refuge,” said Gadkari.“Where will Hindus go?” asked Gadkari, adding Indian Muslims have no reason to fear. “The BJP has never discriminated on the basis of caste or religion,” he added. Gadkari said Hindutva means rashtriyata (nationalism) and the religion doesn’t teach to harm others. Terming the anti-CAA protesters as ignorant, Gadkari said, “We have seen how protesters were unable to explain why they were fearful or protesting when they were asked questions by TV channels.”Several pro-Hindutva speakers sought to reach out to the Muslim community, with RSS-BJP functionaries pledging that the CAA wasn’t meant to snatch away anybody’s citizenship, but to grant one.Opposition leader in the state assembly Devendra Fadnavis also participated in the rally briefly after garlanding the statue of Rani Laxmibai at Jhansi Rani Square.Rajya Sabha member Vikas Mahatme, mayor Sandip Joshi, former minister Chandrashekhar Bawankule apart from sitting and former BJP MLAs and local BJP, RSS, VHP, Bajrang Dal functionaries were also present at Samvidhan Square.Giri Maharaj reiterated the BJP government’s stand on the citizenship law. “The CAA is not against any community, especially Muslims. Without understanding the law, people are opposing it in the entire country. There is no need for Indian Muslims to fear,” he said.“Some people don’t mind betraying the country which gives them their livelihood. Indian Muslims are not with the traitors. The Rohingyas, internal enemies, urban Naxals would be decimated by the law, and are therefore resorting to rioting,” he said.Giri Maharaj said the CAA’s ultimate aim is a united India as it was before the Partition. “Ye toh abhi jhanki hai, POK (Pakistan Occupied Kashmir) abhi baaki hai,” he said, drawing huge cheers from the crowds. The crowd began chanting ‘Modi, Modi, Modi’ when Giri Maharaj said the country has been waiting for years for its loyal son to fulfil this long cherished dream.Some other speakers also slammed West Bengal chief minister Mamata Banerjee for allegedly depriving Bangladeshi Hindus of Indian refuge for vote bank politics.Calls were also given for an ‘Akhand Bharat’ (undivided India) for which the speakers said CAA was the first step.Team TOI randomly spoke to several supporters who had turned out at Yeshwant Stadium. Here are a few reactions:Sunil Wahane said he came for the rally as he was a BJP member. “CAA is a much needed law as three crore people have infiltrated the country,” he said.Couple Nitin and Namita Agrawal said, “CAA desh ke liye sahi lag raha hai.”Housewife Mamata Puri said, “We all should stay together for national security.”Balkrishna Sutarne said, “We want akhand (united) India.”Medical shop owner Rajesh Battad said, “Anti-CAA protests must be peaceful.”
