AMU students, teachers 'expel' V-C, Registrar for allowing police on varsity campus during CAA protests

AMU students, teachers 'expel' V-C, Registrar for allowing police on varsity campus during CAA protests | Photo Credit: IANS

Key Highlights UP police entered AMU campus on December 15 night and allegedly thrashed the students holding anti-CAA-NRC protests Winter vacations were declared prematurely after the incident and the varsity was closed till January 5

Lucknow: The teachers, students and non-teaching staff of Aligarh Muslim University (AMU) in an unprecedented move “expelled” the varsity’s Vice-Chancellor (V-C) and Registrar. Just as internet services resumed on Sunday, students issued the statement expelling V-C Tariq Mansoor and Registrar S Abdul Hamid.

The statement said that the V-C and Registrar are requested to vacate the V-C lodge and Registrar lodge by January 5, 2020, when the university opens.

The notice said the university administration will be boycotted by teachers and students until the two resign and leave the campus.

The students and teachers are pained by the administration’s decision to allow police on the campus of the university. A group of students also threatened to not allow the university to function properly till Mansoor and Hamid tender their resignations.

The development comes days after the alleged police crackdown on university students over Citizenship Amendment Act (CAA) and the National Register of Citizens (NRC) after which the university was closed till January 5.

As many as 26 people including eight students were arrested in connection with the violence at AMU and surrounding areas. However, the security situation greatly improved in the following days.

After the police action, hostels at the AMU were evacuated overnight with 9,500 out of 11,500 students leaving for home, university officials said.

The police subsequently released those arrested on personal bonds. SSP, Akash Kulhari, told PTI, "Out of these 26 people arrested from the AMU campus on Sunday night, only 8 are students of AMU, while the rest are outsiders."
