CPEC facing jolts of closure?

The China-Pakistan Economic Corridor (CPEC) has entered its second phase. This is the time for a review of the first phase and goal-setting for the second. Meanwhile, the International Monetary Fund (IMF) has emerged as the third player with its views, terms, conditions, interests, and concerns.

A China-focussed Pakistan would like the whole world to believe that the West is using the IMF for pressurizing Pakistan into backtracking from deals it sealed with China-the superpower of the East-under a grand bilateral partnership framework.

The militarisation of Gwadar remains a security concern; weakening and eventual disintegration of Pakistan economy under Chinese exploitation being the other. The West and IMF sought transparency much later. However, neither Pakistan nor China paid any heed.

Now the Pakistan government is yielding to pressure. A media report of early December hints that Pakistan has probably demanded transparency in CPEC contracts to malign Beijing. China is fuming. Chinese envoy to Pakistan declared publicly that CPEC projects are free of corruption. A displeased China threatens to scrap all contracts and leave Pakistan if the government fails at course correction. The news report is yet to be denied by either side.

The United States and other Western nations are uncomfortable with CPEC contracts. Prime Minister Imran Khan looks forward to the second phase to kick-start growth in the social sector, industry and agriculture. The US-China tensions have morphed into a trade war, raising challenges for Pakistan’s policy-balancing.

The West detests Pakistan drifting closer to China. The IMF was concerned its loan money could be diverted to settle Chinese loans under CPEC, making support conditional on scaling down Chinese involvement in Pakistan’s economy. In July, the IMF approved $6 billion loan for Pakistan which has been debating the transparency of CPEC and the real dividends it would yield.

Pakistan government appreciates the value of massive Chinese investment in power and infrastructure projects and the support China has already garnered in business circles on the strength of completed projects worth $28bn. It also values the political dimensions of ties with China to checkmate India.

US diplomats warn that the multi-billiondollar CPEC project would push Pakistan deeper into an already stifling debt burden, foster corruption and repatriate jobs and profits to China. Despite this, Pakistan defends ties not just with China but also CPEC, and vehemently denies that the megaproject has increased its debt burden dramatically. The loan component of the massive CPEC investment is barely $4.9bn, a tiny portion of Pakistan’s $74bn total public debt.

Pakistan leaders avoid commenting publicly on reported threat by China, but admit privately that China is not happy with the pace of progress on CPEC projects. However, the convergence of interests of two nations is too strong for a major setback on the CPEC front.

The United States and other Western nations may frown to their heart’s content on deepening Pakistan ties with China, but these ties are not up for bargain. China has proven time and again to be the most dependable ally of Pakistan which will not trade this relationship of trust for anything. “China has not given an ultimatum and the IMF and CPEC can coexist,” optimists aver.

There are no second thoughts on CPEC in Islamabad or Beijing though China is bargaining hard on an incentive package for investors in special economic zones and Gwadar. Government-to-government deals were the hallmark of the first phase of CPEC, while the second phase is a business-to-business engagement. China could defer the loan repayment beyond 2022 if Pakistan’s fiscal issues persist. An exchange of information, with not just China but all major trading partners, can prevent rampant corruption. Pakistan should pursue it, forgetting Chinese threats on CPEC. CPEC benefits Punjab and Khyber Pakhtunkhwa and ignores Sindh and Balochistan and needs de-politicisation. Pakistan can’t annoy China in this regionally hostile environment. There is a need to remove bottlenecks and make CPEC more broad-based, with benefits of the megaproject equitably shared between all provinces.

Pakistan’s neck is stuck in CPEC hole. It can’t get in further and can’t get out either. Everything-the quantum of loan, rate of interest, repayment schedule, and details of revenue generation-is wrapped in secrecy. The ostrich-like mentality of Pakistan won’t help.

Photo Credit : Getty Images

Like this: Like Loading...
