‘If Politics Creates Religious Issues…’: Sanjay Raut Quotes Martin Luther King To Hit Out At BJP Over CAA

New Delhi:

Amid ongoing protests against Citizenship (Amendment) Act, Shiv Sena leader Sanjay Raut on Monday launched a veiled attack on the BJP by quoting words of late American leader Martin Luther King Jr. If politics creates religious issues, then one should know the country is being run by wrong people, Raut said while attributing the comment to the legendary civil rights leader.

"The country where religious issues are addressed politically becomes great. But one should know the country is being run by wrong people if its politics creates religious issues," Raut tweeted quoting the American leader, but did not specify any issue.

Shiv Sena had earlier supported the contentious Citizenship (Amendment) Bill in the Lok Sabha with some suggestions, but staged a walkout during voting on it in the Rajya Sabha, saying there was no clarity on questions raised over it by the party. The Sena has however decided to abstain from protests against the law, even as it has raised some questions over the amended law.

Earlier, Maharashtra Chief Minister Uddhav Thackeray hit out at the Centre over the Act, saying that he doesn't think the Narendra Modi government has any plan for the settlement of Hindu immigrants from other countries. "I would like to know how and where the Hindus from other countries are going to be settled. I don't think you (Centre) have a plan for it," Thackeray said targeting the government over the new citizenship law.

Shiv Sena chief had also slammed the Narendra Modi government over the alleged police atrocities against the students of Jamia Millia Islamia University. Speaking at an event in Nagpur, the Maharashtra chief minister compared the Jamia crackdown with Jallianwala Bagh massacre of 1919. "India will be the country of largest youth. By 2022. It is youth bomb and don't try to explode that," Thackeray had warned the Modi government.

For all the Latest India News, Download News Nation Android and iOS Mobile Apps.
