After CM Yogi's warning, 67 shops sealed in UP's Muzaffarnagar over CAA-related violence

Protesters resort to stone pelting at security personnel during CAA stir in Lucknow | Photo Credit: ANI

Key Highlights The UP administration has seized more than 67 shops of alleged offenders who committed violence during anti-CAA protests in the state Chief minister Yogi Adityanath pledged to avenge losses during protests by auctioning properties of offenders and imposing fines The exercise is yet to commence in Lucknow and Sambhal and a four-member committee has been formed to execute the task

Muzaffarnagar: The authorities have sealed more than 67 shops in Uttar Pradesh’s Muzaffarnagar after the state government started its exercise to identify individuals who were involved in violence during anti-Citizenship (Amendment) Act protests.

The spokesman of the government stated that if the participation of the individuals in committing violence was confirmed during investigations during anti-CAA stir then their shops would be seized.

The actions of state administration come after Chief Minister Yogi Adityanath warned the protesters of avenging the losses during protests by auctioning the properties of those who committed violence.

"There has been violence and public and private property has been destroyed in several districts in the state and we will deal with it strictly. All properties of those involved in damaging public assets will be seized and auctioned to compensate for the losses," Yogi Adityanath had said.

He stated that the offences of those involved in damaging public and private properties were being established using CCTV footage and video clips of the incidents.

"The mob had gathered outside these shops and we are still investigating who are responsible for the violence," said Abhishek Yadav, Senior Superintendent of Police (SSP) Muzaffarnagar.

On Friday, massive protests against CAA and the proposed National Register of Citizens erupted in Muzaffarnagar and 12 other districts in the state. Soon after Friday prayers, violence started during the protests. The demonstrators vandalised vehicles and committed arson.

Several cars and nearly 10 bikes were set ablaze. As many as 30 people were injured, including 12 police officers.

Few parts of the state are still reeling under prohibitory orders. Internet services have been suspended in the administration’s attempt to contain the spread of any inflammatory content that might incite violence or fuel the passions of people to protest.

The process of sealing properties of offenders in Lucknow and Sambhal has not commenced. The district magistrate has set up a committee of four members to conclude the process in 30 days.
