HC sets 20-day deadline for compliance of order

editorial@tribune.com

Saurabh Malik

Tribune News Service

Chandigarh, February 8

Just over two months after the Chandigarh Administration and its functionaries were directed to promote inspectors Dilsher Singh and Gurmukh Singh as Deputy Superintendents of Police on the availability of vacancies, the Punjab and Haryana High Court has set a 20-day deadline for the compliance of the order.

Disposing of the matter, Justice Nirmaljit Kaur directed Union Home Secretary Rajiv Gauba and other respondents to consider the present contempt petition as a contempt notice and comply with the direction forthwith. “In case the needful is not done within 20 days from today, the petitioner will be at liberty to file a fresh contempt petition,” Justice Nirmaljit Kaur added.

The direction came on a petition filed by Gurmukh Singh through counsel Surya Parkash alleging non-compliance of the order, dated December 5, 2018, vide which the direction was issued to promote the private respondents immediately on the availability of vacancies.“It is obvious that the present contempt petition has been filed without giving a contempt notice to the respondents, Justice Nirmaljit Kaur further added.

The Bench of Justice Rajiv Sharma and Justice Harinder Singh Sidhu had earlier observed that the respondents before the court were inspectors in the Union Territory of Chandigarh. Their conditions of service for promotion as Deputy Superintendents of Police were governed by the Punjab Police Services Rules.

It was not in dispute that the next channel of promotion for the respondent officers was Deputy Superintendents of Police. However, a decision was taken by the Central Government to send certain officers as Deputy Superintendents of Police in Chandigarh on a deputation basis. The respondent inspectors, under these circumstances, filed an original application before CAT, which was disposed of on April 26, 2017. Allowing the application, the tribunal, in its ruling, set aside the order, dated July 29, 2016, and any other subsequent transfer order regarding the appointment of Delhi, Andaman and Nicobar Islands Police Services (DANIPS)-cadre officers to the posts of DSP in Chandigarh. At the same time, the UT was also directed to consider the case of applicants and other similarly situated persons for promotion to the next post of DSP, if they were otherwise found eligible within two months from receiving a certified copy of the order.

Speaking for the Bench, Justice Sharma said the Bench was informed that respondent Amrao Singh had been promoted subsequent to the order, dated April 26, 2017. Dilsher Singh and Gurmukh Singh were considered by the duly constituted selection committee, but they were not promoted for want of vacancies. Respondent Charanjit Singh, too, stood promoted. “Accordingly, the present petition is disposed of with a direction to the petitioners to promote the private respondents, Dilsher Singh and Gurmukh Singh, immediately on the availability of vacancies”.
