In one voice, 80,000 Bengaluru citizens reject CAA

People from all walks of life joined the peaceful stir at Quddus Saheb Eidgah Ground

BENGALURU: Over 80,000 people rallied to condemn the Citizenship (Amendment) Act on Monday, the biggest display of disapproval against the contentious law in the city so far.

The protesters converged on Quddus Saheb Eidgah Ground, which became packed in no time. Thousands spilled out on adjacent streets and localities, including Nandidurga Road and JC Nagar.

Chants of unity and India’s secular principles rang out along with an emphatic rejection of CAA and the National Register of Citizens. The huge event, ‘Peace Protest Against CAA & NRC’, passed off peacefully.

“We have been in Bengaluru for three generations. We specialise in servicing Bullet motorcycles. I am rarely reminded of my identity. But CAA has brought the issue of my faith in focus. It’s very unfortunate,” said Jaleeuddin Pasha, who lives in Hale Guddadahalli.

Several women also participated in the demonstration. Naseema Banu said the government appeared to be targeting a particular community. “Triple talaq was banned and we were told Muslim women were on a par with women of other religions. But why is this government now isolating us in the guise of CAA and NRC?” she said.

The protest was organised by ‘Joint Action Committee – Karnataka Against CAA 2019 & NRC’. Police had anticipated a turnout of 1 lakh and deployed a 10,000-strong contingent at the venue and surrounding areas. An officer estimated that 80,000 to 90,000 people joined the protest.

Three inspectors known for their skill of public interaction stayed put at the gate. Tanveer Ahmed, Raghavendra and Rao Ganesh spoke to participants entering the ground, stressing on the need to maintain calm.

The neighbouring Nandidurga Road was teeming with crowds right from the morning. Citizens waved the tricolour and shouted slogans and statements such as “We are Indians”, “Jai Hind”, “when we are Indians, why an attempt to divide us on religious basis?”, “one nation, one religion – humanity” “no one can snatch citizenship from us” and “reject CAA and NCR”.

With protesters arriving from across the city, there were traffic snarl-ups at South End circle, Minerva Circle, Town Hall, Mysuru Bank Circle, Sirsi Circle, Yeshwantpur flyover and Cauvery junction, Ulsoor, Old Airport Road and Bannerghatta Road. There were also tailbacks from TV Tower junction to Cantonment station on Jayamahal Road. Businesses, including restaurants and petrol bunks, in JC Nagar remained shut.

Joint police commissioner (traffic) BR Ravikante Gowda, however, said the traffic situation was not very bad. “Everything went according to the plan. The rally organisers followed our guidelines,” he said.


