Bangladesh denies visa to West Bengal minister Siddiqullah Chowdhury, had threatened Amit Shah over CAA

West Bengal minister Siddiqullah Chowdhury | Photo Credit: ANI

Key Highlights Government of Bangladesh denied visa to Siddiqullah Chowdhury citing 'technical grounds' Chowdhury had applied for visa of Bangladesh 10 days ago and had booked his tickets in advance Chowdhury had recently threatened Home Minister Amit Shah over CAA saying he won’t be allowed to step out from Kolkata airport

Kolkata: West Bengal Minister and state president of Jamiat-Ulema-e-Hind Siddiqullah Chowdhury, who had threatened to stop Union Home Minister Amit Shah from stepping out of the Kolkata airport if the CAA is not withdrawn immediately, has been denied the visa to visit Bangladesh.

Chowdhury had applied for a visa of Bangladesh 10 days ago and had booked his tickets in advance as well. However, today he was informed that the visa has been denied and reasons for denial of visa has not been cited.

According to a report by Times Now, the government of Bangladesh denied a visa to the minister citing 'technical grounds'.

Recently while speaking at a Jamiat-Ulema-e-Hind rally against the CAA at Rani Rashmoni Avenue in Esplanade he had said that Shah will not be allowed to step out of the city airport if necessary.

“We may gather one lakh people there to stop him unless the CAA is withdrawn,” he had said.

The minister in Mamata Banerjee-led Trinamool Congress government further accused Modi-Shah of thrusting one agenda after another on the people. He also said that they don’t believe in discussions and they don’t believe in having dialogues adding that the Jamiat will not allow them to pursue this act.

He then thanked Chief Minister Mamata Banerjee for coming out to register her protest against the CAA and the NRC.

After Chowdhury’s statement, the BJP slammed CM Mamata Banerjee for failing to take any action against him with state BJP General Secretary Sayantan Basu alleging that Sharia law, and not the Indian Constitution, was in force in the state. He further dared the minister to try and implement his threat.

"Sharia laws are in force in West Bengal. The Indian Constitution is not in force in this state. The state is becoming West Bangladesh," IANS quoted Basu as saying.

Targeting the CM, Basu further said that till now she had not even recommended to the Governor about the removal of Chowdhury. Chowdhury is the state's library service minister and is considered close to the CM and TMC supremo.

The BJP had recently said that his party would give citizenship to all Bengali Hindus who have come to the state as refugees.
