Xinhua Asia Pacific news summary at 1600 GMT, Dec. 25

You are here:

HONG KONG -- The government of China's Hong Kong Special Administrative Region on Wednesday refuted a statement by Britain-based Hong Kong Watch about the so-called "police brutality" on the Christmas Eve.

"There is nothing further from the truth in these false accusations and fabrications," a government spokesman said. "The police had adopted a measured and restrained approach throughout. Only minimum force was deployed in response to the blatant unlawful activities of the violent protesters on the Christmas Eve." (HK-Government-Refute)

- - - -

NEW DELHI -- Chief Minister of India's central state of Madhya Pradesh Kamal Nath Wednesday led a protest rally against the Citizenship Amendment Act (CAA), officials said.

Nath said he would not allow the implementation of any such law in his state which discriminates on the basis of religion and is against the spirit of the country's constitution. (India-Law-Protest)

- - - -

HONG KONG -- Rioters continued to commit disruptive and violent acts in various areas of Hong Kong on Wednesday after wreaking havoc on the Christmas Eve.

Large groups of masked rioters started to gather in shopping malls in Causeway Bay, Mong Kok, and Tsim Sha Tsui since the afternoon, which seriously disrupted public order and cast a shadow over the festival. Facing the disturbance, many shops had to close. (HK-Violence)

- - - -

SUVA -- Chinese tourists are very important for the tourism development of the Pacific island countries like Fiji, said a Fijian official on Wednesday.

"As the Pacific island countries like Fiji, we warmly welcome Chinese tourists as they are contributing to the development of our tourism," Nanise Masau, director of Fiji's Department of Tourism told Xinhua while welcoming the arrival of the Costa Atlantica cruise which carries about 1,800 Chinese tourists. (Fiji-China-Tourists)

- - - -

JAKARTA -- The death toll of a fatal bus accident in Indonesia's South Sumatra province two days ago rose to at least 28 with 13 others still missing, a senior official of a search and rescue office said on Wednesday.

Thirteen others have been treated in nearby Basemah Hospital in Pagaralam district for their serious wounds, Yusuf Latief, head of the National Search and Rescue Office's Communications for Media Section told Xinhua via phone. (Indonesia-Bus Accident-Casualties) Enditem
