After voting for CAB, BJP’s ally SAD now opposes NRC

NEW DELHI: Less than a month after BJP lost one of its oldest allies, Shiv Sena , Shiromani Akali Dal (SAD), a key partner of the NDA at the Centre, said it is “opposed to” the Citizenship Amendment Act and the NRC (National register for Citizens) since they go against the “Muslim minorities” in the country.The statement comes even as the party voted in favour of the CAA in Parliament.“Look at what is happening across the country (referring to protests, violence against CAA-NRC). There is a sense of fear among Muslims. We are also a minority party (of Sikhs). My party president has already articulated and I am also making it clear that we are against anything that creates fear in the minds of minorities,” SAD leader and senior Rajya Sabha MP Naresh Gujral told TOI on Wednesday, when asked about his views on CAA and NRC.“We are also a party of minorities (Sikhs). Hence we are against anything that creates fear among minorities and the Muslims are living in fear today,” Gujral added.He elaborated on CAA being against minorities, by pointing out how “the crux of Guru Nanak ’s teachings is “sarvat da pala” (wishing well for all). Sikhism is a democratic religion where all faiths are seen as equals and respected.”During a TV interview on Tuesday, Gujral said, SAD was “against the NRC” and wants Muslims to be included in the list of refugees seeking citizenship under the citizenship law.SAD chief Sukhbir Singh Badal had said that his party does not support CAA as the legislation is against the Muslim minorities, last week.Gujral also said that his party, which supports BJP at the Centre and has one member in the Union Cabinet, could rethink that support if "amends" were not made.The SAD MP reminded the present BJP leadership of the "Vajpayee touch," and urged them to follow in the footsteps of late former Prime Minister and respect the allies."It is unfortunate that in the NDA discussions (referring to key legislations like the Citizenship Act) do not take place. It is also unfortunate consultations do not happen. This is why bulk of NDA allies are unhappy," he said."I've said it time and again... we need that Vajpayee touch. Vajpayeeji ran a coalition with almost 20 parties. Yet everybody remained happy because everybody was given respect... they were treated with equality. Vajpayeeji’s doors were always open... there was consultation," he continued, saying that the only BJP leader who had learned those lessons was Arun Jaitley , who passed away earlier this year."As long as he (Jaitley) was there, I would say channels always remained open... we always had a go-to person. Unfortunately, after his demise, these channels are really not working," he said.When asked if the Akali Dal was considering withdrawing support, Gujral said that depended on "what kinds of stances the government takes.""...depend on what kinds of stances the government takes. As I've said, I've talked to many other allies and nobody is really happy... nobody is happy with the fact meetings don't happen time to time and I think some amends needs to be made," he said on the TV interview.Gujral also urged the NDA to focus on promises made to people in 2014, suggesting that recent electoral reverses - such as Maharashtra and Jharkhand - may have been because the party had strayed from its earlier stated agenda."We were elected in 2014 on an economic agenda and we need to focus on that. The people of India still feel that Prime Minister Narendra Modi can change their lives for the better - whether housing, education, healthcare or, importantly, jobs. But the focus must move back to the economy," he said.
