Maharashtra state cabinet expansion plans still in limbo

Maharashtra Assembly election

Maha Vikas Aghadi government

Ashok Chavan and Prithviraj Chavan

Sena and NCP are ready with their lists but Congress is still undecided

NCP chief Sharad Pawar

The delay is being attributed to intense lobbying within the Congress for key ministerial berths.It has been two months since theresults were declared, but the new government’s cabinet expansion plans appear to still be in limbo. The sources in the government attribute the delay to Congress’s indecisiveness. There is no consensus in the party on who should get ministerial berths, which has resulted in the postponement of the swearing-in ceremony twice. There is intense lobbying within the Congress for key ministries.Though the constituents of the tri-party alliance are seemingly on good terms with each other, the delay in expansion has raised questions about the viability of the. The sources said that two senior Congress leaders,, both former CMs, are in the race for ministerial berths but many junior leaders are opposed to it. The Congress wants the two leaders to play a bigger role in the party’s organisation.“We need to promote young faces and regional representation is also necessary. The party needs to concentrate on areas where it is weak. But if the same senior leaders get cabinet berths, then public perception about the Congress won’t change. One has to remember that fresh faces will draw young voters to the party,” a Congress leader said on condition of anonymity.The sources said that NCP and Shiv Sena are ready with their candidates but have to wait for the Congress to finalise its list.had warned last week that if the Congress couldn’t make up its mind, then NCP and Sena would go ahead with cabinet expansion.However, the warning has not helped matters. “The party needs permission from the Delhi high command and the process involves lots of steps and a long waiting period. For us, NCP and Sena, all decisions are taken here in Maharashtra, hence, we are quick,” an NCP leader said.As per the Sena mouthpiece Saamana, the swearing-in ceremony will be held on December 30 at 1pm. The cabinet will have 36 ministers, of which Sena and NCP will each have 10 cabinet and three state ministers. The Congress will have eight cabinet ministers and two state ministers. However, the government hasn’t confirmed the news.
