Best Of 2019: Meet 13 Indians Who Will Restore Your Faith In Humanity!

There's no denying we still have a long way to go when it comes to eradicating poverty, eliminating malnutrition, empowering women, making our country a safe space for women and children, and creating equal rights for the LGBTQ+ community.

But, when we witness the groundbreaking work some individuals carry out for the good of humanity, it makes the world seem like a better place.

In the spirit of another fabulous year-end, we have put together a list of those individuals who have made lives about doing good for others. Read on about these brave and selfless souls, who taught us how to keep society before self and making the world a better place!



Shree Gauri Sawant is a well known transgender activist and a role model for the community. Today if you are able to choose the ‘third gender’ on something as common as an Aadhar form, you have Gauri to thank for it. However, her efforts do not stop here. The difficult lives of people living in the red light district of Mumbai are often overlooked by many. It is that part of the society where few dare to make a change. Shree Gauri Sawant is a strong beacon of light in those dark alleys and to souls that have resigned themselves to sex work.

Aysha Renna is a 22-year-old history student at Jamia Millia Islamia who stood up to the Delhi policemen as one of her male friends, was being pulled by the collar and assaulted. She, along with two other women, faced the police undeterred and formed a shield to safeguard him during an anti-CAA protest.

Doing her bit to protecting and contributing to the environment, 49-year-old Chikapalli Anasuyamma, a resident of Pastapur village in Telangana’s Sangareddy district, has planted more than two million saplings on barren, unused or neglected lands. She has been instrumental in setting up two dozen forests across 22 villages in the district.

Sex trafficking in India is an issue that needs to be dealt with with the utmost urgency. Every year, thousands of girls across the country are sold into sex slavery. However, a few girls who were once sold into prostitution, today aspire to become leading lawyers in the country. Survivors of the crime of Commercial Exploitation of Children (CEC) have one thing in common - they are now working as lawyers for girls who are still being sold for prostitution.

In August 2019, Kerala witnessed second major flooding leaving behind a huge trail of destruction. Amid all the gloom, one man has been winning hearts and applause for his generous contribution to support his brothers and sisters in need. Noushad, a roadside garment seller in Ernakulam donated the entire stock of garments in his godown. "Tomorrow is Eid, this is my Eid. When I die, I can't take any of these with me. My profit is helping others," Noushad told Indiatimes.

For Chennai-based environmentalist Arun Krishnamurthy, watching garbage being dumped in a nearby pond, was the impetus to quit his well-paying job at Google and launch an eco-movement that has cleaned and restored at least 93 freshwater bodies across 14 Indian states.

There are some landmark initiatives being taken by people to make our country cleaner. Ripu Daman is one such personality who has been doing his bit for the past couple of years. He said he was on a mission to make India litter-free and he hopes to run across the country cleaning up 50 cities. He has covered about 22 cities so far and is all enthusiastic about wrapping up another 28 cities in the coming months.



Hailing from Kolkata, Biswas is a 25-year-old software developer. She knows web development, built IoT solutions, and done some interesting work in the field of Artificial Intelligence application. She's been recognized by NASSCOM, Intel and Google, among others, for her software development work. Apart from her noteworthy coding and programming chops, she founded the 'Women in Technology Community' in Kolkata in May 2017 to empower women to learn and explore new technologies.

With an aim to change the lives of those who have nothing, a shopkeeper in Delhi has been running a makeshift school for more than 300 underprivileged children beneath a metro bridge in the Yamuna Bank area for the last eight years. His endeavour to educate and change their lives is as inspiring as profound.

Stepping out for a walk after 10 pm might really not be a big deal for men, but for women, well, we all know it's a big no, no. Some places aren't safe for women and we've heard this statement for way too long. But people are now fighting back and reclaiming their space. Among those harping for the right to free and safe public space is this 19-year-old girl named Pooja Pasi, who has installed lights in public spaces to make those areas safe.

K Kamalathal runs a shop from her house at the age of 80. What does she do? Every morning she opens her doors to customers and sells fluffy, yummy idlis with delicious sambar and chutney for just Rs 1. She gives them away for free to those who are poor all in the hope of ensuring that people don't starve or go to sleep on an empty stomach. When asked whether she'll ever increase prices, she said no, adding that this has never been about the money.



Assam floods have been devastating, not just for the over 55 lakh people who have been affected, but to a large population of wildlife including the endangered one-horned Indian Rhinos, tigers, elephants, and deer. And that's why it was heartwarming to see a group of people working round the clock to help the hundreds of wild animals who couldn't fend for themselves.

As they say, not all heroes wear capes. There are people who emerge as heroes just by doing their duty with full dedication. All we need to do is to recognise their hard work. Dimbeswar Das, a guard with the Assam Forest Department was honoured with the RBS Earth Heroes Award 2019 for his hard work in saving endangered white horn rhinos in Kaziranga National Park.

Images: Reuters
