Berhampur breakfast to bust eclipse myth

Berhampur/ Bhubaneswar: Academicians, rationalists and activists gathered at a private school in Berhampur for breakfast with a mission — to demolish myths about eclipses — on Thursday morning when people across the world were eagerly waiting for the passing of the moon between the Sun and the Earth.A large section of people in the state as well as the country consider a solar or lunar eclipse inauspicious for having food, offering prayers and travelling. Incidentally, the state government declared a holiday in all its schools and offices “in view of the solar eclipse”. Not only this, the ruling BJD, too, held its 22nd foundation day celebrations in the afternoon, a long time after the eclipse.“There are many who fast during an eclipse owing to some superstitious beliefs. We are trying to dispel the myth that taking meals during an eclipse is harmful,” said ET Rao, president of the Humanist Rationalist Organisation (HRO), which organised the myth-breaking early morning meal in Berhampur. Earlier too, this Berhampur-based organization had organised a dinner for residents of the city during lunar eclipses.“There is greater awareness now and many people are coming forward to eat during a solar or lunar eclipse,” said Sudhir Rout, an educationist attached to the HRO. “Until a few years ago, even roads would be deserted during a solar or lunar eclipse as people wouldn’t step out of their homes out of fear of bad omen. Things have now changed a lot,” he added.J Suresh, another HRO member, explained that these superstitious beliefs originated during the pre-electricity era when an event like a solar or lunar eclipse would mean complete darkness and people would keep their food covered to keep the insects away. He added that people didn’t eat till light reappeared, probably for their own safety.Also in Berhampur, student-members of Vigyan Chetana Manch made arrangements for viewing the celestial spectacle at Khallikote College ground. Many were disappointed when they could not see the eclipse through a telescope because of the thick clouds in the sky.Surabhi Jena, a Plus II student, said, “We couldn’t see anything because of the clouds.”Bhabani Shankar Mishra, convener of the Ganjam unit of the Manch, said they had advised students in Berhampur and Chhatrapur not to watch the eclipse through the naked eye. They had distributed sun-filter glasses and books on eclipses among the students.In Bhubaneswar, people thronged the Pathani Samanta Planetarium and the playground of BJB Autonomous College where special arrangements were made for viewing the eclipse.“Despite a forecast of rain and a cloudy sky, a good number of people turned up to have a glimpse of the eclipse which started around 8.20am and lasted till 11.22 am,” a planetarium official said.In Puri, special rituals were held at the Jagannath Temple. Temple authorities said the presiding deities were offered a ceremonial bath and bhog. The temple, however, remained closed for visitors during the eclipse time.Planetarium officials said the obscuring of the sun by the moon at the time of the greatest phase of partial eclipse on Thursday was around 55% to 65% in the state and 54% in Bhubaneswar. The next solar eclipse will be visible from India on June 21, 2020.
