‘CAA is also against 40% of Hindus’

Dr Babasaheb Ambekdar

Photo by Nilesh Wairkar

Prakash Ambedkar said no other political party has included Indian tribes in anti-CAA protests; they will be the most affected, he said

Student leaders to converge at Azad Maidan today

Jamia Millia Islamia

Jawaharlal Nehru University

Aligarh Muslim University

IITBombay

Tata Institute of Social Sciences

STARTURN



Barmer, Rajasthan Student union president, TISS

Bhatta Ram

At a rally in Dadar, Prakash Ambedkar says it’s definitely anti-Muslim; brings together members of denotified tribes.Accusing the BJP and Rashtriya Swayamsevak Sangh (RSS) for trying to divide the country, the Bahujan Vanchit Aghadi president Prakash Ambedkar on Thursday demanded the resignation of Union Home Minister Amit Shah. Addressing a massive rally and procession in Dadar to oppose the CAA (Citizenship Amendment Act) and the National Register of Citizens (NRC), Ambedkar said, “Despite their claims, the CAA-NRC are definitely 100 per cent anti-Muslims. It will also go against 40 per cent of the Hindus in the country and, hence, must be fought by all communities.”Among the 2,000-strong crowd at the rally were representatives of the Nomadic, Semi-Nomadic and Denotified Tribes invited by Ambedkar to voice their concerns against the Citizenship Law and the “diversionary” tactics of the government. Carrying pictures of the Indian Constitution,’s photographs and the Indian tricolour, the crowd shouted ‘Jai Bhim’ slogans and played local musical instruments with freedom songs like ‘Sarfaroshi ki tammana aaj hamare dil me hai’.Sharing the stage with Ambedkar were VBA's Dr Arun Sawant, youth leader Sujat Ambedkar, Siddharth Mokale, shephard community leader Navnath Padalkar, Amarsingh Chowhan of the Banjara community, the leader of Pardhi community Kishan Chavan, among others. Their concerns ranged from citizenship documents to detention camps.Demanding answers from former chief minister Devendra Fadnavis, Ambedkar asked, “If those detention camps in Navi Mumbai are for foreign prisoners then why is the capacity around 2 lakh?” He was referring to a detention camp in Nerul which has now been scrapped by the MVAgovernment as reported by Mumbai Mirror on December 24. “During the British rule, people who were condemned to detention camps never returned; many died there. In case any such detention camps come up in Maharashtra, we will go and demolish them,” he declared.Arguing the reasons for protesting separately, he said the other parties didn’t include any representatives from the oppressed community in the protests. “Unless these tribes protest loudly, nobody will take cognisance of our existence and objections.” He said 16 per cent of tribesmen in India don’t have any documents. “They don’t have a house to stay. They carry their house on the back of a donkey and struggle to live. What documents is this government expecting from such Indians?” he asked.Disha Pinky Shaikh, a transgender and spokesperson of VBA said, “PM Modi couldn’t present a paper of his degree and he will give us a certificate of citizenship? We will make sure this law is revoked.” Rajaram Patil, leader of state fishermen’s community said, “This is clearly an attempt of second partition and we should not fall for it.” Banjara, Vadar, Pardhi, Vasudev, Nandiwale and Kolhati tribes made the two hour-protest their platform to share concerns. They said for years the Britishers put them in social jail and labelled them as ‘criminals’. Now the CAA-NRC fight will make their life difficult as well.Baburao Chavan, who represents the Mariaai-Kadak Laxmi community in Bhoiwada, said, “My children were not born in a hospital. We don’t have documents. My family is here to protest.”In a parallel three-hour protest in Malvani, over 7,000 people came together. They walked with the tricolour and placardsm raising slogans in a march from the MHADA colony to Malvani ground. This was the largest anti-CAA gathering after the August Kranti Maidan and Dharavi protests last week. Zuber Hashmi of Sanvidhan Bachao Desh Bachao Samiti said, “Residents participated in this march because we care for our country. The arrogance of the lawmakers is upsetting and we want to request them to peacefully revoke it.”-------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------Student leaders fromand theare bringing the anti-CAA protest to Azad Maidan today. Called by the Joint Action Committee (JAC) for Social Justice – an umbrella body of city-based activists, students and social organisations – the protest, called ‘Inquilab Morcha’, will raise voice against the police brutality at CAA protests across the country.Initially planned as a rally from Byculla to CSMT, it was converted into a protest gathering due to lack of police permission. Joining student leaders will be Delhi-based activist Umar Khalid, former High Court judge BG Kolse Patil and actor Swara Bhaskar. “The student community has played a very crucial role in highlighting the problems with the new Citizenship Law. The students from Jamia and Aligarh Muslim University have been instrumental in galvanising the opposition to CAA, NRC and NPR. Some of these leaders will address the rally to guide and motivate the youth in raising their voice against fascism and the majoritarianism of the government,” a JAC member said.-------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------The protests against the Citizenship Amendment Act (CAA) and National Register of Citizens (NRC) have seen thousands of youth storming the streets of their city. This series looks at the faces behind the viral picture and video of young people who are voicing their concerns about these legislations, which they feel, threaten to tear apart the social and constitutional fabric of IndiaFromMasters second year, Water Policy and GovernanceI’m protesting against the Citizenship Amendment Act (CAA) and National Register of Citizens (NRC) because I feel they are completely unconstitutional. Article 14 of our Constitution states clearly that every citizen is equal, irrespective of their religion, caste or gender. But the current government is tampering with the Constitution and working towards destroying our rich diversity. If we don’t protest now, there will be nothing left to defend soon. We will have no answers when future generations ask us what we did to stem the tide. I have been to the August Kranti Maidan protest on December 19 and I plan on attending several more protests. We are rallying fellow students every day and raising awareness about NRC, CAA and NPR by exhorting people around us when we travel in the locals. We are also telling people about the false information about these legislations which are being circulated. We fear that the government’s citizenship drive is only focused on excluding a religion and violates secular values. My hometown is Barmer, which is near the Pakistan border. There, Hindu refugees are celebrating, thinking they will finally get citizenship. But Muslim refugees, who already lived in fear, are even more worried now about being locked in detention camps. About 40 per cent of India's population is illiterate. They don’t have their own birth certificate, where will they get all the right paperwork?
