CAA protests: BJP’s Sanjeev Balyan raises question on Deoband’s role in CAA protests, calls for probe

Sanjeev Balyan | Photo Credit: Twitter

New Delhi: Firebrand BJP leader and MoS Sanjeev Balyan has called for a probe in the involvement of Deoband's role in violent anti-CAA protests in Saharanpur. He further questioned the presence of children in the protests.

West Bengal Chief Minister Mamata Banerjee has assured people that no one will have to leave Bengal or the country due to CAA or NRC. She also expressed confidence that the ongoing movement against the Citizenship Amendment Act, 2019 will continue and that it will be a success.

Students and social activists today held a protest against the Citizenship Amendment Act and the National Register of Citizens (NRC). The protesters gathered at the Azad Maidan in south Mumbai and gave slogans against the government. They carried banners decrying the Modi government over the move.

Internet services continue to remain suspended in parts of Uttar Pradesh ahead of planned protests against the Citizenship Amendment Act (CAA). Police have so far arrested 317 people and 79 cases have been registered in connection with the violence during the protests in Meerut. Protests also took place near Delhi's Jama Masjid, where police have stepped up the security citing Friday prayers.

Citizenship (Amendment) Act protests:

10:34 pm: Rahul Gandhi will address an anti-CAA rally in Guwahati, which has seen massive protests this month against the new citizenship law. The public meeting is due at Khanapara Veterinary Field on Saturday and has been named 'Ashtitwa Rakhyar Samabekh.'

10:15 pm: Accusing the BJP-led NDA government of having tinkered with the law related to the National Population Register exercise, West Bengal Chief Minister Mamata Banerjee on Friday said her government stayed the work for updating it as she did not want to do anything that could put people in trouble.

9:55 pm: Mobile internet resumes in Lucknow.

9:30 pm: Union Minister and BJP leader Prakash Javadekar on Friday said that decision of Kerala and West Bengal governments to stop the process for National Population Register (NPR) updation was "nothing but worst anti-people politics".

9:15 pm: Kanhangad Deputy Superintendent of Police: Police lathi-charged after Democratic Youth Federation of India (DYFI) workers pelted stones on RSS route march that was passing through Nileshwaram today. Cops are in the process of registering cases against those involved in violence.

9:00 pm: Goa Forward Party chief Vijai Sardesai on Friday slammed the Pramod Sawant government in the state for defending the Citizenship Amendment Act.

8:55 pm: Permission was denied to Telangana BJP MLA Raja Singh to hold a public meeting in support of the CAA at the NTR stadium here on Saturday as he did not produce any proof of booking the ground, among other reasons, police said on Friday.

8:30 pm: MoS and BJP MP Sanjeev Balyan has called for a probe in the involvement of madrasas in anti-CAA protest and violence in Muzaffarnagar. He has said that the involvement of madrasa boys aged between 12 and18 in stone-pelting and arson must be probed.

"Also who incited them to join violent protests," he questioned.

8:05 pm: West Bengal Chief Minister Mamata Banerjee: No one will have to leave Bengal or the country. This movement will continue & it will be a success. Don't be scared and worried.

7:40 pm: A delegation of the Samajwadi Party led by its national president Akhilesh Yadav on Friday met Uttar Pradesh Governor Anandiben Patel, demanding justice for "innocent people framed in fake cases" during peaceful and democratic anti-CAA protests.

7:30 pm: CPI-M politburo member and former Tripura Chief Minister Manik Sarkar alleged that whenever the Left leaders and members protest against the new citizenship law and NRC, they are attacked by BJP workers, while the police remains a mute spectator.

7:15 pm: Addressing a rally organized by `Sanvidan Sanman Manch' at August Kranti Maidan here in support of the CAA, Devendra Fadnavis said that the Act does not take away the citizenship of any Indian. He also questioned the silence of former ally Shiv Sena on the issue.

7:00 pm: Apart from the Jama Masjid, a protest was also held in Jor Bagh while the planned 'gherao' of UP Bhawan by the Jamia Millia Islamia students was foiled by the Delhi Police after protesters were detained as soon as they arrived at the venue.

6:40 pm: In Kolkata, the opposition Left Front and the Congress took out a joint rally to oppose the CAA.

6:30 pm: Hundreds of protesters, many of whom gathered after offering Friday prayers at the Old Delhi's Jama Masjid, took out peaceful demonstrations, under a heavy security cover and drone surveillance in the national capital, against the Citizenship Amendment Act.

6:15 pm: Sources: BJP to organise a national-level conference in 1st week of January to reach out to Muslims to counter opposition's campaign on citizenship issues in the community. Also, a nationwide 'sampark abhiyan' will be carried out to meet the opinion-makers of the Muslim community.

6:08 pm: BJP leader Devendra Fadnavis today said that those who have vowed not to implement the amended Citizenship Act in their states are working against the Constitution of India.

"Those who have vowed not to implement the Citizenship (Amendment) Act in their states are working against the Constitution of India. If a law is passed in the parliament, states are bound to implement it," Fadnavis said.

6:05 pm: Seemapuri violence case: A Delhi Court allows police to carry out bone ossification test of one of the accused who claimed to be a juvenile.

5:50 pm: Bollywood superstar Akshay Kumar on Friday urged people to stay away from violence during the Citizenship Amendment Act protests, irrespective of their political leanings.

5:45 pm: Union Min Sanjeev Balyan on Dec 20 Muzzafarnagar violence: I'm told children aged 12-18 yrs participated. If children are involved in pelting stones, it's not good. Who sent children from Madrasas, that should be investigated. Deoband is nearby, an investigation can be done.

5:30 pm: About two dozen Indian students from various research institutes in Israel staged a silent protest in front of the Indian embassy here on Friday against the amended citizenship law and the proposed National Register of Citizens, terming them acts of "state-sponsored instrument of class and religious persecution".

5:10 pm: All entry and exit gates of Lok Kalyan Marg are open now and normal service has resumed.

5:00 pm: Mumbai: Former Maharashtra CM & BJP leader, Devendra Fadnavis arrives at August Kranti Maidan where the demonstration is being held in support of CAA.

4:40 pm: K'taka Min S Suresh Kumar on Rs 5 lakhs each to families of Mangaluru protest victims announced by Mamata Banerjee: Mamata Banerjee's generosity is conditional. She didn't find necessary to pay compensation to those murdered in West Bengal especially by Trinamool Congress cadre.

4:30 pm: Friday prayers pass off peacefully in Uttar Pradesh: DGP OP Singh. Ahead of Friday prayers today, Internet services have been suspended in 21 towns and cities of western and central UP. He further said there was no report of any untoward incident from anywhere in the state and the state was placed under a thick security cover with the deployment of central paramilitary forces in sensitive areas.

4:20 pm: Student activists from Delhi and Uttar Pradesh will be part of the 'Inquilab Morcha' set to be held at the Azad Maidan in south Mumbai today against the Citizenship Amendment Act (CAA) and the National Register of Citizens (NRC).

4:10 pm: Security Update Entry and exit gates of Lok Kalyan Marg are closed. Trains will not be halting at this station.

4.00 pm: People staged a protest in Jor Bagh on Friday, demanding the release of Bhim Army chief Chandrashekhar Azad. Azad was detained near Daryaganj during a protest march from Jama Masjid to Jantar Mantar.

3.30 pm: Parvinder Singh, Additional DCP Delhi South: Situation is peaceful here (in Jor Bagh), there is a gathering of 50-60 people only. They have been requested to disperse from here. So far they are adhering to the instructions given.

3.00 pm: Delhi: A meeting was held at the residence of Union Minister Mukhtar Abbas Naqvi in view of the protests against Citizenship Amendment Act across the country. BJP leader Shahnawaz Hussain, National Commission for Minorities (NCM) chairman Ghayorul Hasan Rizvi and others were present.

1.54 pm: Anti-CAA protests lead by the Bhim Army underway at Jor Bagh. Bhim Army members have demanded the immediate release of their leader Chandrashekhar Azad

1.12 pm: Congress leader Rahul Gandhi: Whether NRC or NPR, it is a tax on the poor, demonetisation was a tax on the poor. It is an attack on poor people, now the poor is asking how will we get jobs?

11.40 am: Sandeep Dikshit says, "I said most of them (police) are corrupt, didn't say all are corrupt. Politicians are answerable to ppl, the same way public services are answerable too. When police don't function neutrally, then people feel police isn't fulfilling its responsibility as per the Constitution."

11.37 am: Delhi's Karkardooma Court to hear on 30th January the bail petition filed by 2 accused in Seelampur violence case.

11.32 am: Prakash Surya, DCP North East Delhi: Ahead of Friday prayers, adequate police force and 15 companies of paramilitary forces are deployed in the area. We conducting flag march in Seelampur, Jafrabad, Welcome and Mustafabad areas. We are appealing to people to maintain peace.

11.00 am: Ex-Congress MLA Mateen Ahmed who has been named in FIR in connection with Dec17 Seelampur anti-CAA violence: We were denied permission for the bike rally. Police know I don't speak instigating language. This has been done on the direction of the Home Ministry to cause damage to Congress

10.47 am: OP Singh, UP DGP: Law & order situation is absolutely under control, we continue to have a strategic deployment of forces, Special Investigation Teams formed to investigate cases. We have suspended internet services in 21 districts, they will be restored as & when the situation demands

10.27 am: ‘People linked to PFI have been arrested’, says DGP OP Singh. "We had appealed to people to not incite violence. So it cannot be said that the police action was unwarranted and unexpected," says Singh. "We are not touching innocents and we will not spare people who were involved in it (violence). And that is the reason we have arrested active members of many organisations, whether it is PFI or any other political parties," he said.

9.58 am: Hyderabad police have denied permission to BJP MLA from Goshamahal Assembly Constituency, Raja Singh to hold a public meeting in support of National Register of Citizens and Citizenship Amendment Act.

9.42 am: Internet will remain suspended in almost 15 cities in Uttar Pradesh. Security has been stepped up in the state ahead of the Friday prayers and planned protests against the Citizenship Amendment Act (CAA) 2019.

9.19 am: Uttar Pradesh Govt: Mobile Internet services and SMS messages of all mobile service providers except BSNL to remain suspended in Lucknow on 27th December.

8.27 am: Information & Communication Department of UP: 498 people have been identified in connection with the damage caused to public property during recent protests in Lucknow, Meerut, Sambhal, Rampur, Muzaffarnagar, Ferozabad, Kanpur Nagar, Mau and Bulandshahar.

8.00 am: 79 cases have been registered and 317 people were arrested in Meerut ahead of planned protests against Citizenship Amendment Act (CAA) 2019.

7.55 am: A man named Hajji Qadir came to the rescue of policeman Ajay Kumar after he was surrounded and beaten by a violent mob during anti-CAA protest in Firozabad
