Maharashtra: Cabinet expansion to take place next week; Ashok Chavan likely to get key portfolio

State cabinet expansion

cabinet expansion

Balasaheb Thorat

Mahavikas Aghadi

Ashok Chavan

Prithviraj Chavan

Balasaheb Thorat

BMC polls

Sharad Pawar

Uddhav Thackeray

scheduled for next week; Congress sends list of hopefuls to high command.After much deliberation, Congress has submitted to the party high command a list of probable candidates to be inducted into the state cabinet. The much-awaitedis expected to take place next week. It was postponed due to Congress’s indecisiveness.Congress state presidentconfirmed on Thursday that the party’s list of probable ministers is now ready. “We have prepared the list. Discussions obviously take time. There was no deliberate delay,” Thorat said.There are about 10 posts of ministers to be filled from Congress’ quota in the Shiv Sena-ledgovernment.Sources in the party said that former Chief Ministeris likely to be inducted into the cabinet, while another former Chief Ministeris likely to get a bigger role in the organisation. The sources said that the party needs senior leaders in the cabinet along with the new faces to keep the balance with other parties intact.Ashok Chavan being the seniormost leader, along with Thorat, is being considered for an important portfolio, the sources said.The party would also ensure regional and community balance in the cabinet and promote a few new faces this time. Mumbai, too, would have adequate representation as theare scheduled to be held after two years. The party is very weak in the city and other urban areas, and hence the focus on the 36 Assembly seats in Mumbai is a must, a senior Congress leader said. Vidarbha has given more MLAs this time so the region would have good representation in the cabinet.Speaker of the Assembly Nana Patole and Minister Nitin Raut both are from Vidarbha.Nationalist Congress Party and Shiv Sena on the other hand are ready with their lists of ministers. NCP chiefhad warned last week that if the Congress did not provide its list of candidates in time, the NCP and the Sena would go ahead with cabinet expansion.The swearing-in ceremony will be held on December 30 at 1pm. The cabinet will have 36 ministers, of which Sena and NCP will each have 10 cabinet and three state ministers. Congress will have eight cabinet ministers and two state ministers.The state Assembly results were out on October 24 and Shiv Sena chiefsworn in as the chief minister of the new alliance on November 28. Two ministers from each party took oath along with Thackeray.
