Maharashtra: Severe cold wave turns Nagpur into a hill station; temperature plummets to 5.1 degrees Celsius

Representational Image | Photo Credit: IANS

Key Highlights In 2018, the Orange City recorded 3.4 degrees Celsius on December 29, which was the lowest in 100 years The region is expected to receive a light downpour accompanied by a thunderstorm on New Year’s Eve The IMD today issued a 'red' warning for Delhi

Nagpur: Nagpur city today turned into a hill station with the minimum temperature plunging to 5.1 degrees Celsius – the second-lowest of the century for the city.

In 2018, the Orange City recorded 3.4 degrees Celsius on December 29, which was the lowest in 100 years.

According to the India Meteorological Department (IMD), the city will be covered with haze throughout the day with the minimum and the maximum temperature hovering around 5 degrees Celsius and 26 degrees Celsius.

The region is expected to receive a light downpour accompanied by a thunderstorm on New Year’s Eve.

Apart from Nagpur, Delhi, Punjab, Haryana and Chandigarh are also likely to be affected by the cold wave on Saturday.

The IMD today issued a 'red' warning for the national capital after severe cold wave gripped the national capital.

The red colour signifies extreme weather condition. The temperature in many parts of Delhi on Saturday morning was 1.9 degrees Celsius.

"Cold day to severe cold day conditions very likely in many pockets over East Madhya Pradesh, Jharkhand and Odisha," stated IMD in its All India Weather Warning Bulletin.

Dense fog is likely to engulf isolated pockets over

Few areas in Punjab, Haryana, Chandigarh and Delhi, Uttar Pradesh, north Rajasthan, north Madhya Pradesh, Bihar, Jharkhand, Sub-Himalayan West Bengal, Sikkim, Odisha, Assam, Meghalaya and Nagaland, Manipur, Mizoram and Tripura are likely to be engulfed by dense fog.

Dense fog conditions have affected flight operations and train services in Delhi with many trains running late.

Latest satellite imagery shows dense cloud cover engulfing most parts of northwest India and Indo Gangetic plains.

Delhi's Palam and Lodhi Road recorded 3.1 degrees Celsius and 1.7 degrees Celsius temperature.

As per the reports by the IMD, rain is likely in the capital city and its adjoining areas such as Noida, Gurugram, Ghaziabad and Faridabad from December 31 onwards.

Cold weather condition is likely to continue till January 3.
