NPR, NRC will be worst than demonetisation: Rahul

IMAGE: Congress leader Rahul Gandhi during party's 135th foundation day at AICC HQ in New Delhi, on Saturday. Photograph: Kamal Kishore/PTI Photo

On the Congress' 135th foundation day, party leader Rahul Gandhi on Saturday stepped up his attack on Prime Minister Narendra Modi over the National Population Register (NPR) and the proposed National Register of Citizens (NRC), terming the exercises 'note bandi no. 2' and warning that they will be more disastrous than demonetisation.

The party, as part of its protests against the NPR and the proposed (NRC), also carried out what it called were 'flag marches' across the country to take its 'Save Constitution-Save India' message to the people.

Thousands of Congress workers and leaders hit the streets in various cities such as Mumbai, Delhi, Kolkata and Jaipur to denounce the government's 'anti-people policies' and corner it on the amended Citizenship Act, NPR and NRC.

The basic idea of these exercises is to ask all poor people whether they are Indian or not, he told reporters on the sidelines of the flag-hoisting ceremony at the All India Congress Committee headquarters in New Delhi on the occasion of 135th foundation day of the party.

"His (Prime Minister Narendra Modi) 15 friends will not have to show any document and the money generated will go into the pockets of those 15 people," he said.

Gandhi has previously accused the government of working for select few 'crony capitalists'.

"This will be more disastrous for the people then demonetisation. This will have twice the impact of demonetisation," he said.

On Bharatiya Janata Party calling him a 'liar', Gandhi again attacked Modi over his remarks that there were no detention centres in the country.

"You would have seen my tweet. You would have seen Prime Minister Narendra Modi's speech in which he is saying there are no detention centres in India and you would have seen the video of the detention centre. You can decide who is lying," he told reporters.

On Thursday, Gandhi had attacked Modi over his remarks that there were no detention centres in the country, alleging that 'RSS's Prime Minister lies to Bharat Mata'.

Taking to Twitter, he had also attached a video clip in which Modi accused the Congress, its allies and 'urban Naxals' of spreading the rumour that Muslims will be sent to detention centres.

The clip also shows a purported detention centre being constructed in Assam.

'RSS's prime minister lies to Bharat Mata,' Gandhi had said in the tweet in Hindi with the hashtag 'Jhoot Jhoot Jhoot (lies, lies, lies).

Likening the NPR and the NRC to demonetisation, Gandhi on Friday had said in Chhattisgarh that these exercises are 'tax' on the poor, who will suffer the same way they did after the note ban in November 2016.

"Whether NPR or NRC, it is a tax on poor people of the country. You understand demonetisation.

"It was a tax on poor people. Go to banks and give your money but do not withdraw money from your account. Entire money went to the pocket of 15-20 rich people. This (NPR or NRC) is the same thing," he had said.
