UP Police endangered Priyanka Gandhi's life by manhandling her: Congress

Congress on Saturday accused the Uttar Pradesh Police of "endangering" party leader Priyanka Gandhi's life after the cops stopped her convoy in the middle of a busy road when she was on her way to meet the kin of former IPS officer SR Darapuri and party member Sadaf Jafar who were arrested during a demonstration against the Citizenship Amendment Act (CAA) in Lucknow.

Slamming the Uttar Pradesh government after the state police "manhandled" Priyanka Gandhi, Congress said there was no law and order situation in the state. The party also demanded imposition of President's rule in Uttar Pradesh.

"We condemn the physical violence on protesters and manhandling of Priyanka Gandhi. This government should be dismissed and there should be the President's rule in the state. The matter should be investigated," Congress spokesperson Sushmita Dev said in a press conference

Narrating the sequence of events that unfolded a high-voltage drama in Lucknow on Saturday, Sushmita Dev said, "Priyanka Gandhi was in Lucknow on the foundation day of the party. Priyanka Gandhi was stopped when she was on her way to meet the family members of a retired IPS officer."

Sushmita Dev, Congress: We condemn the physical violence on protesters and manhandling of Priyanka Gandhi Ji. This government should be dismissed and there should be President's rule in the state. https://t.co/lpZK5amxIb pic.twitter.com/WHwUwta5nq ANI UP (@ANINewsUP) December 28, 2019





"Uttar Pradesh Police manhandled Priyanka Gandhi. We want an investigation into the incident. This is despotism. Uttar Pradesh Police misbehaved with Priyanka Gandhi. We have filed a complaint with the CRPF DG," the Congress spokesperson said.

Speaking to India Today TV, Priyanka Gandhi Vadra claimed that the Uttar Pradesh Police tried to stop her and surrounded her, held by the throat by a female cop and pushed by another female cop as she was walking towards Darapuri's residence in Indiranagar's sector 18.

Narrating her experience, Priyanka Gandhi told reporters, "As we were on our way, suddenly a police vehicle came in front of us and the policemen said you cannot go. I asked them why and was told that we will not be allowed to move ahead.

"I got off the vehicle and started walking. I was surrounded and a woman cop held me by my throat. Another woman cop pushed me and I fell down. I was forcibly stopped and a woman officer pulled me up by my neck. But I was determined. I am standing with every citizen who has faced police oppression. This is my 'satyagraha'."
