During UPA tenure, detention camps were established under Foreigners Act not CAA or NRC: P Chidambaram

P Chidambaram | Photo Credit: IANS

Key Highlights 'UPA era detention camps were set under Foreigners Act and not CAA or NRC' Chidambaram gave this statement when asked how the Congress sees the detention camps as different from those that were set up during UPA tenure First detention centre was established in 2008-09 in Assam when Congress’ Taurn Gogoi was in power

New Delhi: Detention camps which were set during the UPA tenure had been established under the Foreigners Act and not in the context of Citizenship Amendment Act or NRC, said Congress leader P Chidambaram.

Chidambaram gave this statement when asked how the Congress sees the detention camps as different from those that were set up during UPA tenure.

Assam currently has six detention camps and all of them have been set up inside jails in the Goalpara, Kokrajhar, Tezpur, Jorhat, Dibrugarh and Silchar.

In November this year, Nityanand Rai, the Union minister of state for home affairs, informed the Rajya Sabha that 1043 foreigners were currently lodged in these detention centres in Assam.

The first detention centre was established in 2008-09 in Assam when Congress’ Tarun Gogoi was in power.

Recently, Chidambaram had cornered the BJP over the CAA, NRC and NPR saying that the saffron party wants to "somehow implement its Hindu Rashtra" project.

The former home minister further said that after coming back to power with a bigger mandate the BJP was focusing on subjects like the National Population Register, the CAA and the NRC.

Rahul Gandhi also took a potshot at Prime Minister Narendra Modi and the central government over the CAA, NPR and NRC saying these exercises would prove to be demonetisation 2.0.

"With these, the government wants to make the poor stand in queues, and help its 15 industrialist friends,” said Rahul.

They will ask the poor to show documents, but would not ask industrialists for it," he said and added that it was simply an exercise to divert the public attention from real issues.

Meanwhile, the BJP has planned a pro-Citizenship Amendment Act campaign across Karnataka from January 1-15 to counter the protests against it by the opposition parties including the Congress.
