Delhi continues to be crippled by cold; temperature today recorded at 3.6 degrees C, IMD issues red alert

Image Courtesy: ANI

New Delhi: Owing to the crippling cold in the national capital, the IMD issued a red alert across the city, for Sunday. This move came about after the temperature dipped to 2.4 degrees Celsius in the national capital on Saturday, with some areas recording temperatures as low as 1.7 and 1.9 degrees celsius. The minimum temperature in Delhi, on Sunday, was recorded at 3.6 degrees Celsius while the maximum temperature settled on 13 degrees celsius. The minimum temperature on Sunday was higher by 1.2 degrees than the minimum temperature on Saturday.

The news agency Ani reported that amid the bone-chilling cold, a lot of people sought shelter in shelter homes on Lodhi road and Sarai Kale Khan on Saturday night. It was also reported that the friends and relatives of patients admitted to AIIMS in New Delhi are also facing problems as they are left to stay at the footpath outside the hospital in such cold weather.

Looking at the current situation. IMD, apart from the national capital, also issued a red alert for Punjab, Haryana, Delhi, Rajasthan, Uttar Pradesh and Bihar, and amber-colour warning for Madhya Pradesh for Sunday. A red-coded warning is given for extreme weather events. Several flights were diverted and trains were delayed on Saturday, due to the cold wave that created dire situations, making it difficult for road, air and railway operations to function smoothly. In addition to that, two people lost their lives while 12 others were injured when several vehicles rammed into one another on the Delhi-Jaipur highway.

Places other than Delhi have also been experiencing dire situations. Punjab and Haryana also recorded extreme temperatures on Saturday with Hisar being the coldest place in at 0.2 degrees Celsius. The temperature in several parts of Uttar Pradesh also dipped lower than two degrees. Additionally, it was also reported that the Dal Lake in Srinagar froze due to the cold wave in the area. The residents of Jammu and Kashmir spent the night shivering with the temperature recorded at minus 5.8 degrees celsius.




