‘Argumentative Indian’ has spoken, PM’s taken note?

Julio Ribeiro

FIRST, Amit Shah frightened the poor among the Muslims (and angered the rest of them) by consistently threatening to extend the NRC from Assam to the rest of the country. Then the CAB was voted into law by an obedient Lok Sabha and a ‘brought to heel’ Rajya Sabha. Then vocal elements of the 60 per cent of the populace that had not voted for the BJP in the general elections exploded in protest!

The Prime Minister recoiled in surprise. His personality and rhetoric had failed to convince the people — and this he had not experienced earlier. He had expected the usual approbation! He got condemnation instead! Was his charisma fading? Moreover, there was imminent danger of a loss of credibility.

He denied that the NRC had ever been discussed in the Cabinet (probably true), nor in inner party circles (totally incredulous). But in this very denial I see the silver lining — the people’s voice is being heard by our undisputed leader! The NRC will either be rolled back lock, stock and barrel (very unlikely, calculated on past experience) or it will be suitably modified to target a tiny portion of Bengali Muslims who have sneaked in for economic reasons (likely to happen).

The reaction of the common man to Amit Shah’s proposed NRC, ‘through the length and breadth of Hindustan’, led to the reaction of Narendra Modi to what he termed ‘the lies being spread by Congressmen and Urban Naxals’. One is left wondering who exactly is spreading lies or who started the exercise of confusing us all.

So many lies keep being told that one has stopped believing any of our leaders. Narendra Modi won two elections on the trot because the common man believed his slogan of ‘Sabka saath, sabka vikas’. The poor in the rural areas believed his promise of development when he followed it up by building pucca houses in the villages and toilets and village roads.

Suddenly, in Uttar Pradesh, those hailing from that state who are eking out a living in Mumbai find that they cannot speak to their nearest relatives back home because the Internet has been shut down and their SIM cards inactivated because of official fear of a popular backlash on Hindutva politics turning sour.

The poor among the Muslims have all the reasons to be scared. Remember the 2002 Gujarat carnage? Only one well-off Muslim, the MP, Ehsan Jafri, was killed. The others who died were all struggling for existence. The property of the well-off was systematically destroyed. Their lives were spared! I had always wondered if there was a sinister design involved? Mr Modi may blame the Gandhi family and ‘Urban Naxals’, but they would not have been required to stoke fires when the poor Muslims have known all along that they are under siege.

What should concern Mr Modi greatly, though, is the anger simmering in the minds of the younger but more educated Muslim youth. I noticed this even during the peaceful demonstration of dissent at Mumbai’s August Kranti Maidan. I did not participate because my broken femur bone and the surgery that followed, combined with age, did not permit me to join. Both my daughters did and so did their numerous friends who, like them, are averse to injustice. They met many others there who were not propelled by politics but the sheer injustice of it all!

The thousands in Mumbai who gathered that day and those who demonstrated in the succeeding days in other parts of the city, did so peacefully. The peaceful nature of the protests will have bothered the duo of Mr Modi and Mr Shah. Where the protesters resort to violence, the justification to clamp down with iron hands will present itself. The victims may allege BJP-sponsored infiltrators have caused the mayhem, but that will be difficult to prove. In the meantime, the authorities have been handed on a platter the excuse they need to use lathis and guns.

One does not know what to make of the fact that Mr Modi has clearly contradicted Mr Shah on the NRC’s application beyond Assam. Normally, it would herald a split between Hindutva’s two frontline votaries. But I doubt if that has happened or even that the two will ever part. They need each other to reach their cherished goal of a Hindu Rashtra.

Fortunately, this country has always been populated by what the Nobel laureate Amartya Sen calls ‘argumentative Indians’ and these Indians just do not like being fed with lies and subterfuge. The ‘argumentative Indian’ has spoken and Mr Modi has taken note! Or has he?

The sudden announcement of a budget for revising the National Population Register, which normally should have gone unnoticed, has been received as another sinister step in the plan to trouble Muslims!

There is certainly some method in all this madness. Any straightforward policy would not have been presented to the people in a manner that raises fear and concerns. All the protestations of the leaders that Indian Muslims had nothing to fear have been dismissed by a long beleaguered community as a sham!
