Delhi's AQI plunges to 'severe' category, may slide further by evening; cold wave conditions prevail

Vehicles ply at a road with headlights on during a cold and foggy night in New Delhi | Photo Credit: PTI

Key Highlights The overall AQI was recorded at 414, claims SAFAR The dense fog covered Delhi's cantonment area and a minimum temperature of 2.5°C was recorded The prevailing conditions have severely affected the train and flight operations

New Delhi: As the dense fog and cold wave conditions continue to engulf the national capital, the air quality index has plunged to the 'severe' category. According to System of Air Quality and Weather Forecasting and Research (SAFAR), the overall AQI was recorded at 414 while the Particulate Matter (PM) 10 was noted at 440 and PM 2.5 was at 264.

The dense fog covered several parts of the city with a minimum temperature of 2.5°C recorded on December 29. The prevailing conditions have severely affected the train and flight operations, resulting in a delay of 30 trains as reported by news agency ANI.

Dense fog cover in Delhi Cantonment area. Minimum temperature of 2.5°C was recorded in the national capital, on 29th December (yesterday). pic.twitter.com/8TWFYlympN — ANI (@ANI) December 29, 2019

Delhi: Air Quality Index (AQI) at 462 in Anand Vihar and at 494 in Okhla Phase-2, both in 'severe' category. pic.twitter.com/xon7FxxYi9 — ANI (@ANI) December 30, 2019

Meanwhile, on Saturday, the India Meteorological Department (IMD) had issued a 'red' warning for the national capital as cold wave conditions continued unabated in the region. The red warning warns about prevailing extreme weather conditions.

SAFAR stated, that AQI may deteriorate further by Monday night while calm surface winds and severe cold day conditions are forecast for the next two days. Under these extremely cold conditions, pollutants are much closer to the surface, hence the deteriorated air quality. SAFAR claimed the top three air pollution hot spots of Delhi are likely to be Vinobapuri, Okhla and Noida/AIIMS.

From December 31 onwards, rain is likely in the capital city and its adjoining areas such as Noida, Gurugram, Ghaziabad and Faridabad. City-based doctors have suggested avoiding outdoor activities in these conditions and residents should stop any activity if they experience any unusual coughing, chest discomfort, wheezing, breathing difficulty, or fatigue and consult a doctor.
