After viral clip, cops get helmet diktat

protective head gear

traffic rules

Nirmal Nagar police station

Bandra East

patrol bike

THE FEBRUARY 3 EPISODE: Constable Pandarinath Aldar was filmed riding a patrol bike helmetless. Nirmal Nagar resident Pawan Sayydani and his two pals stopped him, and a row followed. They recorded the face-off, during which Sayydani snatched Aldar’s bike key, and furiously asked why should cops be allowed to break rules. Aldar was allowed to go after he borrowed a helmet

They have been ordered not to ride bikes without head gear; recently, a constable faced public ire for disregarding the rule.A viral video of a constable riding a bike helmetless in Bandra has prompted a livid Mumbai police to warn its personnel against getting on a two-wheeler withoutA circular issued to all police stations on Friday states that no cop, whether dressed in uniform or plain clothes, should ride without a helmet as such violations hurt the force’s image. It asks senior officers to enforce the rule while adopting a zero-tolerance approach.“Policemen and policewomen who ride motorcycles have been ordered to be wear helmets at all times and follow other,” said joint police commissioner (traffic) Amitesh Kumar.On February 3, constable Pandarinath Aldar, who is attached to thein, was filmed riding ahelmetless. Nirmal Nagar resident Pawan Sayydani and his two friends stopped him, and a heated argument followed. They recorded the face-off, during which Sayydani snatched Aldar’s bike key, and furiously asked why should cops be allowed to break traffic rules when everyday Mumbaikars are fined for every minor violation.The mobile footage shows the constable borrowing a helmet from a passer-by, after which he gets his key back. He rides off then. The clip went viral, triggering the edict on Friday. Sayydani and his two friends, in the meantime, were booked on the charge of wrongful restraint and assault or criminal force to deter public servant from discharge of his duty. A senior police official said despite repeated warnings, some cops avoided wearing helmets. “The circular has made head gear compulsory so such incidents should stop now,” the official said.
