Asaduddin Owaisi urges Bihar CM Nitish Kumar to leave BJP 'for sake of country'

AIMIM chief Asaduddin Owaisi | Photo Credit: ANI

Key Highlights Asaduddin Owaisi urged Bihar CM Nitish Kumar to leave BJP and assured him all the Opposition parties will support him The AIMIM chief also attacked PM Modi and Amit Shah saying "they are not normal people"

Patna: AIMIM chief Asaduddin Owaisi on Sunday urged Bihar Chief Minister Nitish Kumar to break away from the alliance with Bharatiya Janata Party (BJP) citing PM Modi and Amit Shah as reasons. The Hyderabad MP assured the Bihar CM that all the Opposition parties will come to his support once he leaves the NDA government.

While speaking at 'Samvidhan Bachao' (Save the Constitution) rally in Bihar's Kishanganj, Asaduddin Owaisi said, "Narendra Modi and Amit Shah are not normal politicians, Nitish Kumar sahab leave these people, disassociate yourself from BJP, we all will support you. You have made a name for yourself in Bihar; leave BJP for the sake of the country."

Nitish Kumar-led Janata Dal (United) (JD-U) is an ally of BJP in both state and Centre, however, all is not well between the alliance partner ever since the Bihar CM changed his stand on the National Register of Citizens (NRC). Nitish Kumar, whose party voted in favour of Citizenship (Amendment) Act (CAA) in Parliament, has asserted that he will not let the central government implement the NRC in Bihar.

During his address in Kishanganj, Asaduddin Owaisi also trained guns at PM Modi, accusing of misleading and dividing the country through NRC, CAA and National Population Register (NPR). He also said that the prime minister is "hell-bent on destroying the Constitution".

Speaking at the 'Samvidhan Bachao' rally, the AIMIM chief said, "Prime Minister Narendra Modi is misleading the people on CAA, NPR and NRC. Modi wants to divide the country once again by bringing measures like CAA, NRC and NPR."

"Why do you have so much hate for Muslims, Narendra Modi ji? Why do you have doubt on our patriotism?" further asked Owaisi.
