Cops form special teams for New Year eve

Mysuru: The city police have formed 18 special teams, five mobile squads and installed more than 300 surveillance cameras in Mysuru to ensure the safety of residents during New Year celebrations.The police have also set 1am as deadline to end all celebrations.They have also issued a stern warning against trouble makers. If the new year revellers including students are found bothering passersby, residents or any tourists, they will taken to task, said sources. Hotels, spas, apartments, home stays, service apartments, clubs, shopping malls or restaurant owners organising new year parties ushering in 2020 must obtain prior permission from authorities concerned, police said.Necessary permission must be obtained from the excise department to serve liquor beyond 11 pm and organisers must take permission from local police stations to hold mass celebrations before 4 pm, December 30. Loud speaker users must ensure not to bother neighbours in the vicinity by keeping decibel scale low. Organizing indecent programmes in the name of new year celebrations is punishable. Serving narcotic substances and conducting gambling and betting games are restricted.Commissioner of police K T Balakrishna told TOI that all celebrations must end before 1am on January 1, 2020 and the organisers must obtain prior permission from respective authorities. A strict vigil will be kept across Mysuru city to prevent incidents of trouble or harassment to public and visitors.CCTVs have been installed and special mobile teams including traffic personnel have been formed to keep an eye on the revellers. Wheeling and honking on city roads will attract legal action, the commissioner said.Boozing on roads, parks and public places is strictly prohibited, he said.Entry to Chamundi hills restrictedThe police have restrained the entry to Chamundi Hills after 7 pm on the eve of new year, December 31. There are five entry points to Chamundi Hills including footsteps. Tavarakatte Gate, the main entrance, will be closed for public at 9 pm whereas the four other entries will be shut at 7 pm. The restriction will not apply for residents atop the hillock.
