CAA dangerous, divisive; will not implement in Punjab: CM Amarinder Singh

Captian Amarinder Singh, Punjab Chief Minister | Photo Credit: ANI

Key Highlights CM Amarinder Singh asserted that he would not allow implementation of the CAA in Punjab and said that ‘the Congress will fight against it tooth and nail’ He cited that the CAA is divisive and accused the BJP of attempting to damage the secular nature of the Indian constitution He lashed out at the UP government over alleged manhandling of Priyanka Gandhi Vadra and warned CM Yogi saying that the Congress will not forget it and tables would be turned one day

Ludhiana: Amid continued protests against the Citizenship (Amendment) Act and National register of Citizens, on Monday, Punjab Chief Minister Amarinder Singh lashed out at the Bharatiya Janata Party (BJP) and termed the CAA to be "divisive and dangerous" while reiterating his stand that he would not allow its implementation in the state. He asserted that he would continue to battle against the legislation.

"My government will not allow the implementation of the CAA in Punjab and the Congress will fight against it tooth and nail," said the Punjab Chief Minister.

Singh, while addressing Punjab Pradesh Congress Committee (PPCC) leaders and workers during a protest march in Ludhiana, alleged that the BJP is trying to alter the Constitution’s Preamble and urged the people to unite against their "divisive and dangerous attempts" to damage the country’s secular nature. Singh also said that even the United Nations had citied the CAA to be discriminatory.

The protest witnessed participation of senior Congress leaders, including All India Congress Committee (AICC) secretary in-charge of Punjab, Asha Kumari, Sunil Jakhar (Punjab Congress president), among other senior leaders like Gurpreet Singh Kangar, Sadhu Singh Dharamsot, Ravneet Singh Bittu, Manpreet Badal and Preneet Kaur.

Further, Singh warned the BJP and said that the party could not run away from its ‘nefarious designs” and indicated that CAA protests, currently, were being held in 16 states, including Punjab, across the country.

Hitting out at the Yogi Adityanath government in Uttar Pradesh for alleged manhandling of Priyanka Gandhi Vadra (AICC general secretary), he asked the UP CM, "Aren't you ashamed of such actions," and also warned him that the Congress will remember this incident and one day the tables would be turned.

The CM also claimed that the demonstration being held in the economic heartland of Punjab would send a loud and strong message against the CAA across the country.

Taking a swipe at the BJP leaders’ frequent ‘tukde-tukde gangs' comments, Jakhar said that the National Democratic Alliance (NDA) itself was a ‘tukde tukde’ who has been constantly attempting to divide India.

Congress leader Ravneet Singh, who was also present at the protest, termed the CAA to be a black law and expressed that most states will not execute the law in their territorial jurisdictions as 70% of the Chief Ministers are from the Congress now.

Punjab’s Finance Minister Manpreet Badal drew a parallel of Priyanka Gandhi Vadra’s alleged manhandling with that of Mahatma Gandhi’s ousting from a train in South Africa. In the context of the CAA, Manpreet Badal warned the Prime Minister saying that if he attempts to send Indians out of India then Congress will drive him out of the country.
