Beetles, snakes and dinosaurs among species discovered in 2019

More than 400 new species previously unknown to science have been discovered in the past year by experts at the Natural History Museum.

Species described and named for the first time in 2019 include 171 beetles found around the world, one of which was named in honour of teenage environmental activist Greta Thunberg.

Nelloptodes gretae, a previously unknown species of beetle, was named after Swedish climate activist Greta Thunberg (Natural History Museum/PA)

But the experts warn that species are being lost faster than they are being discovered and many may be vanishing before they are even known about.

The museum’s executive director of science, Tim Littlewood, said: “Species discovery is always exciting and shows just how much there is still to understand about our planet.

“Learning how evolution has yielded new species able to live in Earth’s diverse habitats is awe-inspiring.

“Sadly, much of that adaptation and biological diversity is now severely threatened and we are losing species faster than we can discover them.

“We are losing our understanding of the natural world, breaking our own connection with it and the connections that underpin nature’s stability.”

An ancient invertebrate species named Rhenopyrgus viviani was among more than 400 new species previously unknown to science that were discovered in 2019 (Natural History Museum/PA)

Max Barclay, senior curator in charge of Coleoptera at the Natural History Museum, said: “The name of this beetle is particularly poignant since it is likely that undiscovered species are being lost all the time, before scientists have even named them, because of biodiversity loss.

“So it is appropriate to name one of the newest discoveries after someone who has worked so hard to champion the natural world and protect vulnerable species.”

This year has seen the naming of eight lizards, five snakes, four fish and an amphibian native to India, including Trimeresurus arunachalensis, the first new species of pit viper described from the country in the last 70 years, as well as new wasps, centipedes, aphids, snails, moths and butterflies.

Discoveries of extinct species including the pig-footed bandicoot Chaeropus yirratji, an unusual marsupial that had vanished by the 1950s.

A new species of sauropodomorph dinosaur, Ngwevu intloko, was in a South African collection for three decades (Natural History Museum/PA)
