Scientists graft rare species of flowering plant in Western Ghats

Species had disappeared for three quarters of the century; researchers restore it to original location



City scientists have successfully grafted a threatened and endemic species of flower, golden bell, commonly called as songhanti. It is found in small pockets of northern area of Western Ghats. It was recently found in Shrikoli village of Panshet, about 60 km from Pune.



“We came across the species while restoring a 60-acre land parcel. The plant is rare and threatened,” said Ketaki Ghate, a botanist working towards ecological restoration of land.



The flowering plant is listed in International Union for Conservation of Nature (IUCN) as endangered species. “It was confirmed by the locals as well, who said that the plant is limited to the particular pocket,” she said.



Ghate, along with researchers Manasi Karandikar and Mandar Datar, found that rampant grazing of cattle also resulted in discouraging the growth and survival of the species.



“The farmers told that plants were mixed with fodder for its nutritive value. Moreover, mass grazing poses a threat to the habitat. We decided to graft the plants and multiply them. These grafts were planted across space and grown,” said Karandikar.



Their conservation, she believes, is all the more important as the plant grows on slopes with certain elevation and requires peculiar weather conditions. “That is also the reason it is rare and threatened,” she added.



Mandar Datar, a senior scientist at Agharkar Research Institute (ARI), elucidated on the rarity of the species that was first described in 1894 by GM Woodrow and Otto Stapf — botanists from Kew, United Kingdom and close associates of Principle Theodore Cooke of the then Science College, Pune (Nnw College of Engineering, Pune).



The discovery was based on the collections by Namdev Ranade from Amba Ghat, and the species was named abutilon ranadei to memorialise his contribution. Ranade was herbarium keeper in Science College and worked in close association with Cooke.



“The classic species is one of the most charming species described ever from the Western Ghats and remains endemic to the region. The bell-like golden yellow flowers hanging from the shrub is a treat for the eye,” Datar said, adding the plant had disappeared for three quarters of a century after which it was found again.



“The scientists have grafted the plant for the first time, in a bid to reinstate in its natural habitat near Panshet,” Datar said.


