RBI report talks of tough period ahead

Tribune News Service

New Delhi, December 30

The Reserve Bank of India’s Financial Stability Report for 2019 suggests that the coming period will remain tough despite the hopeful anticipation of the economy turning the corner by the government and the industry.

NPAs a challenge The report has warned that the gross NPAs for all banks may touch 9.9% and PSB NPAs 13.2% by September 2020

It has asked PSBs to hedge against higher-than-expected risk losses and counselled private sector banks to improve corporate governance

The Ministry of Finance has rolled out a set of statistics that suggests that commercial banks, the prime movers of credit growth and domestic consumption, are now on the recovery path with a total of 13 banks reporting profits in the first half of the current fiscal. The gross NPAs of public sector banks (PSBs) have declined from Rs 8.96 lakh crore in March 2018 to Rs. 7.27 lakh crore in September 2019 due to “extensive reforms carried out by the government”.

The ministry took heart from the Essar Steel resolution decision and said banks have recovered Rs 38,896 crore, besides Rs 4.53 lakh crore recovered in the last four and a half years.

The industry is also in tune with this sentiment. “The results are fast percolating through and becoming increasingly evident on the ground. Nascent signs of recovery are noted in the form of improved PMIs of manufacturing & services, jump in passenger air traffic, sharp moderation in the decline in sales of passenger cars among others,” said CII President Vikram Kirloskar.

But the RBI’s report underlines the hard climb that remains ahead. It asked PSBs to hedge against higher-than-expected risk losses and counselled private sector banks to improve corporate governance. Gross bad loans at NBFCs increased to 6.3 per cent in September 2-19 from 6.1 per cent six months back. But the risk of contagion has eased from the time when it seemed that a couple of NBFCs might fail. It has also warned that the gross NPAs for all banks may touch 9.9 per cent and PSB NPAs 13.2 per cent by September 2020.

The industry concedes that the GDP in the third quarter may be subdued.
