2019 was Modi all the way but 2020 will be different

Whether one looks at 2019 as annus horribilis or annus mirabilis based on political beliefs there is no doubt that it will go down as one of the 72-year-old Indian nation’s most important years. Like 1950 when Patel died, 1975 when Emergency was imposed, 1977 when Congress was defeated, 1984 when Indira was assassinated, 1991 when Rao-Manmohan liberated the economy, 1992 when Babri Masjid was demolished, 2011 when anti-corruption protests destroyed Congress, and 2014 when Narendra Modi stormed national politics, 2019 could be another breakwater year for India.

After winning a stupendous Lok Sabha victory holding his ground in all of North India and expanding BJP’s footprint in the East, Narendra Modi had all but stymied the opposition. The reprieve Congress achieved in winning three Hindi heartland states in late-2018 was all but nullified. Appointing Amit Shah as home minister set the ball rolling for the new government. The Modi-Shah duo threw caution to the winds in their daring abrogation of Article 370, bifurcation of Jammu and Kashmir and taking away J&K’s statehood. The constitutionality of the legislative action has been challenged but Supreme Court is taking its own sweet time in hearing the petition. Meanwhile, by no stretch of imagination has normalcy returned to Kashmir. With few in the rest of India voicing concerns for the Valley and little public pressure on the government, there is no sign of change in Kashmir’s unfortunate status quo any time soon.

Having pushed such difficult sells like demonetisation, GST, electoral bonds, Article 370 nullification and triple talaq criminalisation without much protest, government appears to have moved on the Citizenship (Amendment) Bill under the assumption that protests will be restricted to Assam and the North-East and some guarantees to indigenous communities would be enough to soothe their anxieties. However, overconfidence appears to have got the better of the likes of Amit Shah who kept mooting a nationwide National Register of Citizens exercise.

The disruptive potential of NRC became a talking point in universities, Muslim neighbourhoods and liberal cocoons. By the time protests erupted and government belated dialed back from NRC, the current National Population Register exercise was next on the public glare. The Citizenship Act rules framed in 2003 is clear that the NPR will lead to a “National Register of Indian Citizens” which will have a local counterpart, the “Local Register of Indian Citizens” at the sub-district/taluk level. Entries in this local register can be questioned by “anybody”. Apart from the hassle of proving parents place and date of birth given how poor documentation was in earlier decades prepare for harassment by antagonistic neighbours, xenophobic politicians and an avaricious bureaucracy. Protests against NPR will also break out in coming days and BJP isn’t doing itself any favour by running #IndiaSupportsCAA campaigns when the discourse has moved well past CAA.

The brutal UP police violence on protesters in some districts have cowed down the protests. Time will tell whether UP chief minister Yogi Adityanath has scored a political victory like Narendra Modi in 2002. Newspaper reports point to widespread support for the police action and CAA among Uttar Pradesh voters. Delhi chief minister Arvind Kejriwal, now a shrewd politician with his ears to the ground, has also stayed uncharacteristically quiet. Apparently, he has also received counsel that taking strong positions could upset the erstwhile pro-BJP votebank in the city that has now gravitated to AAP.

Modi begins 2020 with four immediate challenges. BJP has lost two more state governments this year and several non-BJP governments are not on board with CAA. Many of these governments are yet to make their position clear on NPR and that could pose a serious Centre-State clash. Another problem is the economic slowdown which is eating into tax revenues. The Centre is running behind in settling the GST compensation dues to the states and they are increasingly becoming vocal about their financial difficulties. The third challenge will be diplomatic with Kashmir and CAA upsetting US Dems and countries like Saudi Arabia that Modi had assiduously wooed earlier this year. The last but not the least challenge are the leaderless protests that have kicked off. Managing these difficulties could consume much of Modi’s 2020.

Facebook Twitter Linkedin Email Disclaimer Views expressed above are the author's own.
