No place for violence and revenge in Hinduism: Priyanka Gandhi Vadra

LUCKNOW: Congress general secretary Priyanka Gandhi Vadra on Monday targeted Uttar Pradesh chief minister Yogi Adityanath , saying “there is no place for violence and revenge in Hinduism”.Referring to Yogi’s warning after December 19 anti-CAA violence that rioters damaging public property will have to pay, Priyanka said: “UP CM wears ‘bhagwa’ (saffron) clothes, but it does not belong to him. It belongs to India’s religious and spiritual traditions. It’s a symbol of Hinduism and there is no place for revenge or violence in Hinduism.”Priyanka claimed it is for the first time that a CM has made such a statement and advised Yogi to “embrace Hinduism”. “India is a land of Ram and Krishna, who exemplify compassion. There is no place for violence here. This is for the first time that a CM has said such a thing. All I could tell him is to embrace Hinduism,” the Congress leader said.Drawing reference from the conversation between Krishna and Arjun in the epic Mahabharat, Priyanka said, “In the moment of war too, Krishna did not tell Arjun to take revenge from anyone,” reminding that Indians have the tradition of picking up weapons for the sake of truth only.Priyanka also accused the state police of being partisan. “People from different walks of life are protesting Citizenship (Amendment) Bill, which is absolutely against the spirit of the Constitution. A number of innocent people have lost their businesses and dear ones in the violence. But, instead of standing with them, the state police is threatening them, telling them not to lodge FIRs. The conduct of the police is unlawful.”Asked to comment on the debate over her alleged security breach or traffic violation in Lucknow, Priyanka said: “My security is a non-issue and the fine imposed is a trivial matter. The safety of the common man in UP is at stake. There is anarchy, youth are unemployed while women feel insecure. These are the real issues that need attention.”
