BJP's Chandra Kumar Bose Locks Horns With Meghalaya Governor on Twitter

New Delhi: The West Bengal BJP vice president and Netaji Subhas Chandra Bose’s grandnephew Chandra Kumar Bose said that Syama Prasad Mookerjee’s decision to seek a partition of Bengal in 1947 was a “historic blunder”

Mookerjee, the founder of the Bhartiya Jana Sangh, which was a precursor to the BJP, is considered to be the creator of West Bengal and an ideological founder of the BJP.

Bose’s comments came in response to a tweet by Meghalaya governor Tathagata Roy, who had criticised Bose “for advocating United Bengal, totally against the tenets of his party”. Roy further alleged that Bose was unable to choose “between his party’s ideals and his grandfather Sarat Chandra Bose” and was simply parroting “his ancestry”.

With due respects to @tathagata2 ,I have my own principles & ideology- I don’t parrot anybody’s theory! Problems faced today is due to partition of Bengal & India. Bengal should have remained United, Dr. Syamaprasad Mookerjee had his contribution, but was wrong dividing Bengal. — Chandra Kumar Bose (@Chandrabosebjp) December 29, 2019

In response to Roy’s remarks, Chandra Kumar Bose tweeted saying “I have my own principles & ideology- I don’t parrot anybody’s theory! Problems faced today is due to partition of Bengal & India. Bengal should have remained United, Dr Syamaprasad Mookerjee had his contribution, but was wrong dividing Bengal”.

Also read: Tathagata Roy Put on Leave After ‘North Korea’ Comment; ‘Wild Rumour’ Says Governor

In response to Bose’s tweet, Roy further said that it was hypocritical for Bose to be a “state vice-president of an all-India party” and also “criticise the party’s founder”.

However as the biographer of Dr Syama Prasad Mookerjee I have a view: that SPM was right and your grandfather Sarat Bose (with all due respect) was wrong. The idea of ‘United Independent Sovereign Bengal’ was actually Suhrawardy’s,the man responsible for the bloodbath of 1946 — Tathagata Roy (@tathagata2) December 30, 2019

In a separate tweet, Bose said that he would “fight communal forces to keep the nation United with the spirit of Bharat”.

In another tweet, Roy reiterated his stand and held that the decision to divide Bengal was a “historic blunder” and “was disastrous politically, economically, commercially and socially”.

It was a historic blunder to divide Bengal,which was disastrous politically,economically, commercially & socially. Please read :The Bose Brothers & Indian Independence, Sage Publications, Chapter 6 for an insight. pic.twitter.com/lFzjO2WWgH — Chandra Kumar Bose (@Chandrabosebjp) December 30, 2019

According to a report in the Hindustan Times, BJP Bengal unit president Dilip Ghosh brushed aside Bose’s remarks and took a dig at him. Ghosh said, “He could not deliver a single thing that he promised to do. Maybe he wanted to become an MLA or MP but the people did not give him a chance. He is most possibly expressing his frustration. The party has simply nothing to speak on his remarks.”

Speaking to HT, Bose, however, stood by his comments and further added that he considered Mookerjee communal.

Most recently, Bose dominated headlines when he questioned his party’s stand on the Citizenship (Amendment) Act and asked why Muslims were not included in it as well.
