"Friends In The Opposition Are Very Funny": PM Modi At Tirupur Rally Highlights

For PM Modi's visit to Andhra, Tamil Nadu and Karnataka, several held black flag protests.

Prime Minister Narendra Modi is on a tri-state visit to Karnataka, Andhra Pradesh and Tamil Nadu today where he launches several development projects and kick off the BJP's Lok Sabha campaign. This is the first time the Prime Minister was in Andhra Pradesh after the Telugu Desam Party (TDP) broke ties with the NDA government last year. PM Modi visited Guntur in Andhra Pradesh, Raichur in Karnataka and Tiruppur in Tamil Nadu. The TDP, Congress and Left parties have all carried out big protests across Andhra Pradesh. Hoardings saying 'Go Back Modi', 'Never Again Modi' were reportedly put up near the Vijayawada airport in Andhra Pradesh, but were removed after the BJP protested.

At a rally in Tirupur, PM Modi targeted the Opposition and said, "Friends in the opposition are very funny". He also said middlemen are no longer roaming the corridors of power, a jibe at VVIP AgustaWestland helicopter accused Christian Michel.

PM Modi also unveiled development projects in the twin cities of Hubballi and Dharwad, twin cities in Karnataka. He also addressed a BJP convention. He laid the foundation stone of the Indian Institute of Technology, Dharwad and dedicate the city distribution project in Dharwad.

Here are the Updates on PM Narendra Modi's visit to Andhra Pradesh, Tamil Nadu and Karnataka today:

Feb 10, 2019 20:18 (IST) PM Modi at the last stop of his day-long campaign in Karnataka's Hubli:



We miss the presence of Shri Anant Kumar ji who always worked for the development of Karnataka and the welfare of the poor

Karnataka chief minister appears to be a punching bag for all. Everyone is challenging him and it's difficult to figure out who is the in charge of the state. They want to impose the same 'Mazboor' model on the entire country

Feb 10, 2019 16:12 (IST) PM Modi in Tirupur:



Congress never leaves an opportunity to belittle our army. Few days ago, one of the Congress leader used inexcusable language for the Army chief

By 2022, we are aiming to achieve housing for all and working in this direction 1.3 crore houses have already been built in the last four years

Today the entire world is talking about the development of India. This development is possible due to the strength and skill of the people of India

Middlemen are no longer roaming the corridors of power

Friends in the opposition are very funny. They claim that that Modi government are a failure. The opposition still keep looking to make alliances. This is adulteration.

Opposition's political culture of abusing PM Modi may give them some space in television but the elections are fought on one's vision for the nation, not slander and attack

The opposition is only good at spreading panic. Time and again they have tried to mislead the farmers, poor and youngsters of the nation

Feb 10, 2019 15:59 (IST) PM Modi address a rally in Tirupur: I bow to the land of Tiruppur. This land stands for bravery. It is the land of Tiruppur Kumaran who sacrificed his life for the National Flag. This land belongs to Dheeran Chinnamalai whose bravery motivates the entire country.

NaMo merchandise, t-shirts and hoodies with a message of "NaMo Again" are manufactured in this beloved Tiruppur

After the completion of the integrated building at Trichy airport which was inaugurated few moments ago, 3,000 passengers be facilitated at this airport in the peak hours

In the recent Union Budget, historic scheme of Pradhan Mantri Shramyogi Jan Dhan Yojana was announced to safeguard the well being of those brothers and sisters who work in factories, mills, companies and small industries

Feb 10, 2019 15:58 (IST) DMK and MDMK cadre hold black flag protests against PM Modi's Tirupur visit.



Feb 10, 2019 15:52 (IST) PM Modi arrived in Tiruppur where he laid the foundation stone for ESI medical college hospital. PM Modi, E Palaniswamy and O Pannerselvam share the stage amid speculations of an alliance between AIADMK and BJP



Feb 10, 2019 14:44 (IST)

With the inauguration of another 10km stretch of Chennai Metro by PM @narendramodi today, the total length of metro network in the country has now reached 585 kms.



140 kms has now been inaugurated in 2018-19 alone, while another 60 kms will be operational by March '19. pic.twitter.com/7ruUEWm5wu - Hardeep Singh Puri (@HardeepSPuri) February 10, 2019

Feb 10, 2019 12:53 (IST) Read Here: Prime Minister Narendra Modi To Campaign In Andhra Pradesh Today. TDP, Congress, Left Parties To Protest

Prime Minister Narendra Modi is visiting Andhra Pradesh for the first time after the Telugu Desam Party (TDP) broke out of an alliance with the BJP last year. PM Modi landed in Vijaywada's Gannavaram airport, where he was received by the Governor. The TDP, Congress and Left parties are protesting and large posters of "No more Modi" and "Modi never again" have already come up across the state. Prime Minister Narendra Modi is visiting Andhra Pradesh for the first time after the Telugu Desam Party (TDP) broke out of an alliance with the BJP last year. PM Modi landed in Vijaywada's Gannavaram airport, where he was received by the Governor. The TDP, Congress and Left parties are protesting and large posters of "No more Modi" and "Modi never again" have already come up across the state.

Feb 10, 2019 12:46 (IST) "He's never had to be accountable. Now he's asked about the accountablity of every Rupee": PM Modi



"He (Chandrababu Naidu) has never had to be accountable. Now he's asked about the accountability of every Rupee. This is what bothers him," said PM Modi.



Feb 10, 2019 12:41 (IST) Chandrababu Naidu only replicated centre's development programmes: PM Modi



Taking a swipe at Andhra Pradesh Chief Minister Chandrababu Naidu, Prime Minister Narendra Modi Sunday said he had only replicated the Centre's development programmes instead of his assurance of initiating new schemes for the poor in the state, according to news agency Press Trust of India.

PM Modi said Chandrababu Naidu had not initiated any new programmes for the poor but was only putting his stamp on the NDA government's development schemes, according to PTI.



On providing clean fuel in the country, PM Modi said while in 60 years, only 12 crore gas connections were given, the NDA government had given 13 crore gas connections in just four years.



Feb 10, 2019 12:32 (IST) "CM is part of Maha milawat club": PM Modi



"Their (TDP) leaders are being investigated in various cases. CM is part of Maha milawat club": PM Modi



Feb 10, 2019 12:26 (IST) "Chandrababu Naidu is going to Delhi for photo-ops with people's money": PM Modi



"We are holding this big event with party money, and not taxpayers' money": PM Modi

"Chandrababu Naidu is going to Delhi for photo-ops with people's money," said PM Modi.



Feb 10, 2019 12:24 (IST) "CM of Andhra promised the sunrise of Andhra but is fixated with the rise of his own son," said PM Modi.

Feb 10, 2019 12:22 (IST) "He is asked to give record of every single rupee of taxpayers' money": PM Modi



"He is uncomfortable that I ask him for accounts of his work. He is asked to give record of every single rupee of taxpayers' money," said PM Modi.



Feb 10, 2019 12:19 (IST) "Chandrababu Naidu is scared of losing the election": PM Modi In Andhra Pradesh



PM Modi hit out at N Chandrababu Naidu, saying he was "scared of losing the election." He also said that he wanted to bring his son in politics.

"Your watchman has made him uneasy," said PM Modi, pointing to himself.



Feb 10, 2019 12:14 (IST) "Instead of NTR's promise of Congress-mukt Andhra Pradesh, he has become friends with them": PM Modi In Andhra Pradesh



"But now, instead of continuing NTR's promise of a Congress-mukt Andhra Pradesh, he has become friends with them": PM Modi in Guntur.

Feb 10, 2019 12:11 (IST) "Naamdaar family in Delhi has always disrespected tall leaders": PM Modi



"It was due to the arrogance of the Naamdaar family in Delhi that NT Rama Rao swore to rid Andhra Pradesh of Congress rule," said PM Modi.

"The naamdaar family has always disrespected tall leaders."



Feb 10, 2019 12:05 (IST) "Why does he keep pointing out that he is senior?" PM Modi hits out at Chandrababu Naidu



"He (N Chandrababu Naidu) keeps reminding me he is my senior. But he is senior in backstabbing his father-in-law (TDP founder NT Rama Rao). He is senior in changing parties and making alliances. What has happened to Chandrababu Naidu? Why does he keep pointing out that he is senior?" PM Modi said.



Feb 10, 2019 12:03 (IST) "He told me he would turn around Andhra Pradesh's infrastructure": PM Modi on Chandrababu Naidu



"He (N Chandrababu Naidu) said he would be the sunrise chief minister. But he seems interested in raising profile of his son. He told me he would turn around the infrastructure of Andhra Pradesh. But he himself took a u-turn," says PM Modi.



Feb 10, 2019 12:00 (IST) Only 55% people had gas connection before 2014 but now the number has gone up to 90%, says PM Modi.



Feb 10, 2019 11:53 (IST)

"Amravati is also called as the "Oxford" and the youth from different places come here to fulfill their dreams," says PM Modi.

Feb 10, 2019 11:48 (IST)

Amaravati is the symbol of a new Andhra Pradesh and new India.

The Central govt has selected Amravati as the heritage city under the "Hriday Scheme": PM Modi



Feb 10, 2019 11:38 (IST)

Prime Minister Narendra Modi lays the foundation stone for Krishnapatnam Bharat Petroleum Corp. Ltd (BPCL) coastal terminal project in Guntur: news agency ANI





Feb 10, 2019 11:37 (IST) PM Modi has reached the venue in Guntur where he will address a rally shortly



Prime Minister Narendra Modi reaches the venue in Guntur where he will address a public rally shortly, according to news agency ANI.











Feb 10, 2019 11:31 (IST) Protests were staged across Andhra Pradesh on Sunday as Prime Minister Narendra Modi reached state capital Amaravati on a day-long visit during which he will unveil developmental projects and address a mass rally, according to news agency IANS.

Governor ESL Narasimhan, senior BJP leaders received PM Modi at the Gannavaram Airport at Vijayawada.



He later flew in a helicopter to Guntur where he will launch the projects and address a rally.



Wearing black dresses and carrying black flags, the protesters took to the streets early Sunday morning, according to IANS.

Governor ESL Narasimhan, senior BJP leaders received PM Modi at the Gannavaram Airport at Vijayawada.He later flew in a helicopter to Guntur where he will launch the projects and address a rally.Wearing black dresses and carrying black flags, the protesters took to the streets early Sunday morning, according to IANS.

Feb 10, 2019 10:54 (IST) Protests take place in Andhra Pradesh against PM Modi's Andhra visit









Feb 10, 2019 10:53 (IST) PM Narendra Modi has reached Andhra Pradesh. He will address a public rally in Guntur shortly

Feb 10, 2019 10:26 (IST) "I demand he reply to these 7 questions": Congress leader Dinesh Gundu Rao tweets ahead of PM Modi's visit to Karnataka today





Mr Modi is coming to Karnataka today.

I demand he replies to these 7 questions I've posed on issues concerning injustice to Karnataka.

href="https://t.co/kq2DGHUSIZ">pic.twitter.com/kq2DGHUSIZ - Dinesh Gundu Rao (@dineshgrao) February 10, 2019

Feb 10, 2019 10:24 (IST) PM Modi tweets over his visit to Andhra Pradesh, Tamil Nadu and Karnataka



I would be visiting three states today.



Shall be addressing rallies in Guntur (Andhra Pradesh), Tiruppur (Tamil Nadu) and Hubballi (Karnataka).



You can watch the programmes on the NaMo App. - Narendra Modi (@narendramodi) February 10, 2019
