Govts keep changing, we'll keep an eye on you: Kapil Sibal warns govt officials

Congress leader Kapil Sibal on Sunday issued a warning to all government officials working under the Modi administration that they are being watched for their excessive "loyalty" towards PM Modi.

Addressing the media, Sibal said, "Officials should know that elections come and go, sometimes we are in Opposition and sometimes we are the ruling party. We will keep an eye on all government officials who are over enthusiastic and are trying to show loyalty to the PM. They should remember that Constitution is bigger than anything."

Over the past several months Congress and other opposition parties have time and again accused the Modi government of destroying India's democratic structure and the institutions that make it a democracy, like the CBI, RBI and Supreme Court.

Kapil Sibal,Congress:Officials should know that elections come&go,sometimes we're in opposition&sometimes we are the ruling party.We'll keep an eye on officials who are over enthusiastic&trying to show loyalty to PM.They should remember that Constitution is bigger than anything. pic.twitter.com/VDqn9cGlwl ANI (@ANI) February 10, 2019





Sibal also attacked CAG Rajiv Mehrishi over the Rafale deal and said, "Rafale deal happened during Rajiv Mehrishi's tenure as the finance secretary. Since it's a corrupt deal, probe should be done, but how will the CAG investigate against himself? First he will shield himself and then the government. This is conflict of interest."

On Friday, Sibal said that several institutions, including the Governor's office, vice chancellors of universities and the media, have come under attack under the NDA regime led by Prime Minister Narendra Modi

Reacting to the controversy over veteran actor-director Amol Palekar's speech at the National Gallery of Modern Art (NGMA) being cut short, Sibal told ANI, "Someone is slapped with sedition charges, someone is stopped from speaking. This is the new India. The country is changing like how Modiji had promised 'achhe din'."

Amol Palekar, who was last week interrupted during his speech by some members of the NGMA in Mumbai, said on Sunday that he was only trying to seek reasons behind the cancellation of retrospectives of two senior artists.

Retrospective is an exhibition or compilation showing the development of an artist's work over a period of time.

At the opening of an exhibition in the memory of artist Prabhakar Barwe on Friday evening, Palekar was repeatedly interrupted during his speech by some NGMA members.
