‘Majboor’ HDK worried about saving chair: PM Modi

Hubballi, Tirupur: Prime Minister Narendra Modi Sunday attacked the Congress, saying for the Opposition party the defence sector was only about brokering deals.

Mr Modi’s comments came after party president Rahul Gandhi recently upped the ante on the Rafale row by quoting a media report saying the PMO conducted “parallel” negotiations on the deal. “From the seas to the skies, the Congress has several scams associated with the defence and in the process the party did not allow the modernisation of defence forces for long years that they were in power,” Mr Modi said.

Addressing a party rally at Perumanallur, he said the NDA’s work culture was different from that of the previous governments.

Targeting the Congress, he said “Those who had the opportunity to rule the nation for years did not bother about India’s defence sector. For them this sector was only about brokering deals and helping their own set of friends.”

He referred to the “pathbreaking” step of creating two defence corridors one of which is in Tamil Nadu. He said a defence corridor will bring industry and investment options and opportunities for the State’s youth.

Prime Minister Narendra Modi who arrived in Karnataka on Sunday to launch various projects including the new building of the IIT at Dharwad, made use of the opportunity to castigate the coalition government terming Mr H.D. Kumaraswamy as a ‘weak chief minister.’

Taking potshots at the Mahagathbandhan of opposition parties being planned to take on the BJP led NDA, Mr Modi said attempts are being made to impose a government similar to the coalition at the Centre. Modern India requires a strong government, not 'helpless governments,' he remarked.

Referring to the political instability in Karnataka, he said people are in a state of confusion on who is charge of the state's administration. The CM is getting threats from his coalition partner, the Congress, he remarked.

Commenting on the fight between Kampli Congress MLA Ganesh and his colleague and Hosapete MLA Anand Singh, the PM said ruling party leaders have remained in power only to meet their selfish motives. Drawing a comparison between the loan waiver scheme of the state government and Centre's plans for the welfare of farmers, he said the Prime Minister's Kisan Yojana will benefit more than 12 crore farmers in the country.

"If you compare the schemes launched by the Centre and those of the state government, you will realize the honest effort made by us for the farming community. Though CM Kumaraswamy has announced a loan waiver, it will require 10 years to waive off the loans."

On the opposition attack on him, the Prime Minister said their “political culture of abusing Modi may give them some space in television but the elections are fought on one’s vision for the nation, not slander and attack.”

Remembering Congress stalwart and former chief minister of Tamil Nadu, the late K. Kamaraj, he said the “great” leader always wanted a government in power which has zero tolerance towards corruption. “You have placed a government in Delhi who is putting a lock on corruption,” Mr Modi said.

— PTI
