Tired of single-use plastic? Two plants planned for safe disposal

NEW DELHI: New Delhi Municipal Council (NDMC) and East Delhi Municipal Corporation (EDMC) are planning to set up plastic waste management plants by the end of this year to encourage scientific disposal of non-biodegradable waste in their areas.The initiative has been taken as per Plastic Waste and E-Waste Management and Handling Rules, 2016, which stresses on proper collection, transportation and disposal of plastic waste by municipalities.A senior NDMC official said the plant would be established near Okhla and would process one metric tonne plastic every day. Based on its success, the capacity may be increased in future, said NDMC chairman Naresh Kumar. “We will focus on collecting single-use plastic materials generated by residential households, which have been a major source of nuisance and are not being collected by waste pickers,” Kumar added.The NDMC areas produce 40 metric tonne plastic waste every day, of which 20 metric tonne is picked up by waste collectors and the rest gets dumped at the Okhla landfill site, where it is processed at the waste-to-energy plant, said an official. “This is hazardous to the environment as non-biodegradable waste releases toxic chemical when mixed with municipal solid waste and also affects the efficiency of the waste-to-energy plant during incineration,” he pointed out.“The new plant will crack the plastic into molecule to produce biofuel , which will be of the highest quality, and can be used in any diesel vehicle,” he added.EDMC has also invited tender for setting up a plastic waste management plant at Shastri Park with a daily capacity of 50 metric tonne. “Waste collectors or scrap dealers often decide to burn heaps of non-recyclable plastic just to get rid of them. The practice leads to serious pollution ,” said Pradeep Khandelwal, chief engineer, EDMC.“Under this project, the contractor will collect maximum plastic waste from scrap dealers. This will encourage scrap dealers to earn more by collecting single-use and multi-layered plastic waste. A similar project is already functioning in Chennai,” he said.Experts, however, said such plants were not a permanent solution. “The technique to produce biofuel from plastic waste has not been approved by Central Pollution Control Board. During the melting or cracking of plastic, there are chances of emission of toxic gases,” said Ravi Agarwal, founder-director of Toxics Link, an environmental NGO.Considering 70% of the plastic waste in Delhi is single-use, the only solution is to ban the single-use plastic and look for alternatives such as cloth bags,” he added.
