After claiming to wrest Baramati, CM Fadnavis to share stage with Sharad Pawar

BJP

NCP

Sharad Pawar

Baramati

Devendra Fadnavis

Rashtriya Vayoshri Yojana

Amit Shah

Days after claiming that thewill defeat Nationalist Congress Party () supremo’s daughter Supriya Sule from their bastion ofin the Lok Sabha elections, Chief Ministerwill share stage with Pawar in Baramati on Friday.The two will be in city for launching the Central government’s, a scheme for providing physical aids and assisted-living devices for senior citizens belonging who are below the poverty line.Both Pawar and Fadnavis will share the stage for the event hosted by the central social justice department. Over the last week, there has been a war of words between the BJP and NCP after Fadnavis claimed that the BJP would snatch away Baramati from the Pawars.Fadnavis was addressing a meeting of the party's booth level workers in Pune last week where he attacked Pawar.Fadnavis said that the BJP-led NDA had won 42 seats in 2014 elections. "This time, we will win 43 seats and that will include the seat of Baramati," Fadnavis said amid applause from an enthused cadre.Baramati, located in western Maharashtra is the bastion of the Pawars. Sharad Pawar was elected from the Baramati Lok Sabha seat many times but he vacated the seat in 2014 for his daughter Supriya. The Pawars have never lost from Baramati. In 2014, Supriya won the seat by a margin of over 70,000 votes. Mahadeo Jankar, now a minister in the BJP led state government who heads the Rashtriya Samaj Party, had contested against Sule. 2014 was the only time when a Pawar family member saw their victory margin falling below one lakh votes.During his speech, Fadnavis warned that if the Congress came back to power after 2019 elections, it would be a historic blunder by people of India. “The BJP is going to fight all the 48 Lok Sabha seats. We are confident that we will win one more seat than we won in 2014 and that one extra seat is going to be Baramati,” Fadnavis said.BJP national Presidenttoo asked party workers to win Baramati, upping the ante against the Pawars.Responding to Fadnavis’s barb, the NCP hit out daring the BJP to declare its candidate for the seat first. NCP spokesperson Nawab Malik asked the BJP whether it will field Prime Minister Narendra Modi, Shah or Fadnavis from the constituency."Fadnavis ji and Shah have said that they are going to win 45 of 48 seats in the state, including Baramati. Well they can say anything. We won't be surprised if they say that the BJP will win 50 of the 48 seats in the state too," Malik said."They said they are going to win Baramati also. Who will be there candidate? Modi, Shah or Fadnavis? If the BJP has guts then it must declare their candidate," Malik said.
