National interest can be ignored for sake of 'chowkidar': Mayawati targets Modi

National interest can be ignored for sake of 'chowkidar': Mayawati targets Modi

India

oi-Deepika S

New Delhi, Feb 11: On the day Priyanka Gandhi Vadra made her first public appearance after her appointment as AICC general secretary for eastern Uttar Pradesh, BSP chief Mayawati slammed Narendra Modi government over the Rafale deal for the first time.

In a series of tweets, the former Uttar Pradesh Chief Minister wrote "Government waived anti-corruption clause in Rafale deal, is the latest detail revelation by The Hindu newspaper today. Corruption & corrupt defence deal, No problem! Chowkidar is important for the BJP/RSS, not his honesty? (sic)," she tweeted from her new handle on Monday morning.

Corruption, honesty, national interest and national security etc. Everything can be compromised and ignored for the sake of Chowkidar.



The Chowkidar is moving everywhere in the country on government expenses claiming he is honest and not corrupt. — Mayawati (@SushriMayawati) February 11, 2019

Mayawati's attack came after The Hindu claimed the Rafale fighter jet deal between India and France involved "major and unprecedented" concessions from the Indian government, with critical provisions for anti-corruption penalties and making payments through an escrow account dropped days before the signing of the inter-governmental agreement (IGA).

Chowkidar chor hai: Uddhav Thackeray does a Rahul Gandhi to attack Modi

Mayawati repeated the word "chowkidar", which has been used by Congress president Rahul Gandhi to describe Prime Minister Narendra Modi.

In another tweet, she said the countrymen have to decide as what to do with the "Chowkidar and his so-called honesty?"

"Corruption, honesty, national interest and national security etc. Everything can be compromised and ignored for the sake of Chowkidar. The Chowkidar is moving everywhere in the country on government expenses claiming he is honest and not corrupt," she tweeted, referring to how the PM has said in his rallies that he won't let the corrupt escape.

Mayawati's Bahujan Samaj Party and Akhilesh Yadav's Samajwadi Party recently forged an alliance in Uttar Pradesh and said that they will fight the Lok Sabha elections together. Both have clearly indicated that they will fight against the Bharatiya Janata Party (BJP). Interestingly, Congress was kept out of this alliance.
