AAP to launch 'Your MLA and Councillor at your doorstep' campaign from 15 Feb in Delhi ahead of Lok Sabha polls-Politics News , Firstpost

On Sunday, sources said that the Congress is unlikely to participate in AAP's mega Opposition rally, that will be attended by Mamata Banerjee and Chandrababu Naidu, among other Opposition leaders.

New Delhi: The ruling Aam Aadmi Party (AAP) will launch a campaign - "Your MLA and Councillor at your doorstep" - from 15 February to step up attack against the BJP-led government at the Centre ahead of the upcoming Lok Sabha polls.

AAP Delhi convener Gopal Rai told reporters that party legislators and corporators will interact with people and request them to throw the Modi government out of power during the campaign.

He said the AAP will host a mega rally of Opposition against the "dictatorial" central government at Jantar Mantar on 13 February.

"The AAP will intensify its fight against the Modi-Shah duo in Delhi after the 13 February rally. We will launch 'Your MLA and Councillor at your doorstep' campaign for the Lok Sabha elections from 15 February," Rai said.

Asked whether the Congress has been sent an invite for the mega 13 February show, he said all those who had participated in the rally organised by West Bengal chief minister Mamata Banerjee in January have been invited.

"Invitation has been sent to all those who attended Mamata Banerjee's recent rally against the Modi government. We have not spoken to them (Congress) regarding the 13 February mega rally at Jantar Mantar," the AAP leader said.

On Sunday, sources said that the Congress is unlikely to participate in the mega Opposition rally that will be attended by Mamata Banerjee and Chandrababu Naidu, among other Opposition leaders.

They had also said that with just around two months left before the polls, the rally will serve to bring the Opposition together in firming up a 'Mahagathbandhan' to challenge the BJP and its National Democratic Alliance (NDA) partners in the polls.
