Why Congress and CPI(M) are mulling an alliance in West Bengal

CPM general secretary Sitaram Yechury

New Delhi: The Congress and Left Front are moving closer towards an alliance in West Bengal for the 2019 Lok Sabha elections.

The CPI(M)-led Left Front has indicated that it may not contest on all the 42 Lok Sabha seats in the state. The Left wants to ensure that the “anti-BJP, anti-Trinamool Congress votes” do not get divided. “[W]here we or the Left front candidates are not there, our call would be to defeat the BJP and defeat the Trinamool Congress,” CPM general secretary Sitaram Yechury told mediapersons. “Our theme would be to maximise the pooling of anti-BJP, anti-Trinamool Congress votes.”

Meanwhile, despite effort from leaders of both sides, it’s not clear if the Congress and Trinamool Congress will agree to a seat-sharing arrangement in the state. West Bengal Chief Minister Mamata Banerjee sees herself as playing a critical role in the post-election phase and may be reluctant to concede more than a few seats to the Congress, which continues to be organisationally weak in the state.

Left to itself?

However, a section of the Left Front is not enthused by the idea of an alliance with the Congress. Their reasoning? Any such tie-up will only benefit the Congress as was the case in the 2016 assembly polls when the Congress and Left Front won 76 seats in the 294-member House, but despite the Congress’ lower vote share, it bagged the bigger chunk of seats.

Yet, a four-way split – with the BJP trying to position itself as the principal challenger to the TMC -- is not going to benefit the Left Front, and some sort of tactical arrangement with the Congress may be inevitable.

Interestingly, the Trinamool may not be averse to a Congress-Left alliance as a split in anti-TMC votes between the BJP and others could end up benefitting Mamata Banerjee.

A consolidated anti-BJP front is nearly impossible in West Bengal because of the deep-rooted animosity between the Left and the TMC, which ended the decades-long domination of communists in the state.

For the Left, the choice may well be fading into irrelevance in the state or salvaging some pockets of influence in an alliance with the Congress.

The Kerala conundrum

Meanwhile, the bigger surprise in store may well be in Kerala. Though historically the Left Democratic Front (LDF) and Congress-led United Democratic Front have shared honours in the Lok Sabha polls (in 2014, the UDF and LDF got 12 and eight seats, respectively), the BJP hopes to get a seat or two this time and increase its vote share, riding on the back of the Sabarimala temple agitation.

In this context, a statement by CPI(M)’s state secretary and politburo member Kodiyeri Balakrishnan that the party is open to taking “tactical steps”, as reported by The Times of India, to ensure that the BJP doesn’t get any seats in the state assumes significance.

While it's not being mentioned in public, the possibility of a quid pro quo in Kerala and West Bengal between the Congress and Left cannot be ruled out. The Left parties are at a far stronger wicket in the southern state, and the Congress may be willing to play along to check the rise of the BJP.

The views expressed by the author are personal and do not in any way represent those of Times Network.
