The big news: Priyanka Gandhi debuts in massive roadshow in Lucknow, and 9 other top stories

A look at the headlines right now:

Priyanka Gandhi attends her first roadshow in Uttar Pradesh after getting Congress post: Party chief Rahul Gandhi, who accompanied her, said the Congress would not rest until it forms government in Uttar Pradesh. Twitter CEO Jack Dorsey summoned by parliamentary panel on February 25: The committee on Monday declined to meet Twitter India’s representatives. Budget 2019 passed in Lok Sabha after Congress, NCP and CPI(M) walk out: The Narendra Modi government’s Budget was severely criticised for announcing several welfare schemes despite being presented in an election year. BJP ally Shiv Sena among parties supporting Chandrababu Naidu’s fast in Delhi: The Andhra Pradesh Chief Minister on Monday fasted at the Andhra Bhavan to demand special status for his state. Cows are an important part of India’s tradition and culture, says Narendra Modi: He was speaking at an event organised in Vrindavan, Uttar Pradesh, to mark the serving of the third billionth mid-day meal to underprivileged children. Academic Anand Teltumbde gets interim protection from arrest in Bhima Koregaon case: Centre trying to implicate us in case against Anand Teltumbde, a study group at IIT-Madras alleged. Shutdown called by separatists hinders normal life in Kashmir Valley: Separatists had called for the strike to mark the 35th death anniversary of Jammu Kashmir Liberation Front founder Mohammad Maqbool Bhat. Parliamentary panel highlights low Bru refugee repatriation numbers: The refugees have asked the home ministry to release subsistence allowances that have been held back since November. Rajasthan Chief Minister Ashok Gehlot urges Gujjar protestors to talk to his government: State minister Bhanwar Lal requested demonstrators to refrain from violence. Russian archipelago declares emergency after mass ‘invasion’ of polar bears: At least 52 bears were found near Belushya Guba, the main settlement in the remote Novaya Zemlya archipelago.
