NCLAT extends deadline for Essar Steel order to February 28

Essar Steel

The National Company Law Appellate Tribunal (NCLT) has extended the deadline it had set for its Ahmedabad bench to pass an order on the Essar Steel insolvency case.

The deadline, which was earlier set at February 11, has been extended to February 28.

"The judge has ordered that NCLT should finish off the hearings by February 19," an industry executive said.

The Appellate Tribunal extended the deadline in its February 12 hearing. It was one in a series of court hearings in the Essar Steel insolvency case that were scheduled for the day.

While NCLT will conduct two hearings, the Ahmedabad bench will hear a petition filed by Essar Steel directors.

Though more than 570 days have passed since the case was admitted in the insolvency courts, the finishing line is nowhere near given that the 270-day deadline is well past.

Though NCLAT had set the February 11 deadline, NCLT clearly has unfinished business.

On February 11, it heard some of Essar Steel's operational creditors, who said their interest is not being heeded to by the Committee of Creditors (CoC). The NCLT has asked the rest of the operational creditors to provide a written submission by February 13.

Meanwhile, the Ruias on February 11 filed another petition at the Appellate Tribunal, challenging NCLT's January order that had turned down their plea for consideration of their proposal.

In a last minute move, the Ruias, through Essar Steel Asia Holdings, had submitted a Rs 54,000-crore proposal to repay debts, countering ArcelorMittal's offer of Rs 42,000 crore.

Separately, NCLT will on February 12 hear the petition filed by Essar Steel directors on February 1. Citing the January 31 order of the Supreme Court, the petition said directors of Essar Steel should be consulted by CoC while considering the resolution plans.

The CoC consists of lenders to the insolvent company. The Supreme Court order states that directors of a company facing insolvency should be consulted by CoC before arriving at a resolution.

The directors who moved the application are- Prashant Ruia, Director; Dilip Oommen, Managing Director and Deputy CEO; and Rajiv Kumar Bhatnagar, Director (Projects), Essar Steel.
