Many taken for a ride with promise of high mobile tower rent

Bengalureans are falling prey to a new kind of fraud. They are being cheated by fraudsters “promising” high rentals for providing land to set up mobile towers, and end up losing their deposit money to fraudsters.In January, Anil Kumar received a call from an unknown number telling him he could lease out any property he owned in the city for installing a mobile phone tower. Kumar was promised a rent of Rs 50,000 per month. The catch was that Kumar had to make some upfront payments. “The two callers, a man and a woman, asked me to pay for various formalities such as preparation of agreement, getting insurance for the land, GST, etc. I transferred Rs 2.79 lakh, after which they asked for Rs 1.2 lakh more on various pretexts. That is when I began to doubt their intentions,” he said.Kumar then visited a customer support office of the telecom operator. That is where he learnt that he had been duped, and that the same modus operandi was used to dupe many others as well in the city. The office claimed to have received 4-5 such complaints. Kumar then lodged a complaint at the cybercrime police station.In another incident, Munaf Z had actually applied for installation of a mobile tower on his property on December 21 last year. The next day, he received a call from a person who introduced himself as the one who would install the tower. He asked Munaf to make a payment of Rs 1,57,800 lakh for the installation. He stopped receiving Munaf ’s calls once the money was transferred.Though it is believed that mobile towers emit harmful radiation, the prospect of making extra money appears to be drawing more people into the trap.Until last month, a simple Google search threw up links to at least four websites masquerading as those of telecom firms and offering customers a chance to rent out their properties to install towers on them. Such websites do not appear on a Google search any more, but they still exist.Cases of people getting duped via promises of installation of towers have been reported in other parts of the country, too, including in Chennai, Salem, Hyderabad, Kolkata, Pune and parts of Madhya Pradesh and Uttar Pradesh . The Telecom Regulatory Authority of India (Trai) had issued a public notice way back in 2014 warning users of such frauds.The Telecom Regulatory Authority of India (Trai) had issued a public notice way back in 2014 warning about such frauds.
