In her first address to party leaders, Priyanka Gandhi directs to end factionalism

New Delhi:

It has not been even a month that Priyanka Gandhi Vadra made her debut in active politics and the newly appointed Congress General Secretary is already having her hands full. A day after her mega roadshow accompanied by brother Rahul Gandhi and western region in-charge Jyotiraditya Scindia in Lucknow, Priyanka on Tuesday met several senior leaders and party workers to outline strategies ahead of the upcoming Lok Sabha Elections 2019.

During Tuesday's meeting, Priyanka's most resentment was with the factionalism in the Congress. In her first message to party workers in Mohanlalganj, Fatehpur, Sultanpur, Pratapgarh, Unnao, Lucknow and other Lok Sabha constituencies, the younger Gandhi gave a strict and clear directive to put an end to groupism and factionalism within the party.

"Guthbaazi khatam Karo (end groupism)," Priyanka was quoted as saying during her address. The eastern region in-charge also stressed that all the party workers should unilaterally support those who will be chosen for different constituencies ahead of the General Elections 2019. The workers have been also asked to help people get out of their homes and reach their respective polling booth during the elections. Keeping in mind that Lok Sabha polls are just a few months left, Priyanka decided not to make any big organisational changes.

Besides, Priyanka, in an accusing tone, asked all the Congress workers that when did they last visit or organise an event in their respective areas across in the state. Being asked about the name of their respective booths, the party leaders started looking at each other instead of answering the question of Priyanka Gandhi.

Sources said, Priyanka on Tuesday conducted several rounds of meeting with karykartas, District presidents from each constituency for over an hour and will continue the process on Wednesday.

On Monday, Priyanka did not address the crowd during the mega road show or at the Congress office in Lucknow. It was Congress president Rahul Gandhi who addressed the gathering, adding that the party will fight fo0r its ideologies in the upcoming Lok Sabha Elections 2019.
