Tough time in Bangkok: Indigo develops oil snag

Indigo flight

Bangkok airport

Bangalore

Flight number 6E76

Bengaluru

Several Bengaluru-bound passengers, who had booked their tickets on an, were stranded at theon Tuesday.The passengers took to social media to voice their plight, saying that they were stranded for several hours with no assistance from the airlines.Touseef Ahmed, a passenger tweeted, "@IndiGo6E, we’re a bunch of passengers 50+ stranded on bangkok airport due to cancellation of the inbound flight. We are getting no information on what’s happening and how we get back to." (sic)Another passenger Deepak Tyagi tweeted : "Got stuck at Bangkok airport due to cancellation of Indigo flight which was flying for Bangalore. No next direct flight to Bangalore. Indigo staff is not supporting and they are telling we are helpless. Some of you go to Chennai and some go to Calcutta."Indigo said that the cancellation was because Bengaluru-Bangkok flight had experienced 'oil pressure warning' on one of its engines.“An IndiGo flight 6E 075, operating Bengaluru-Bangkok route experienced an oil pressure warning on one of its engines. The aircraft is a A320 aircraft, powered by V2500 engine. Our pilot followed the laid down procedure and landed the aircraft safely at Yangoon. The aircraft had not reported or observed snag on the earlier flight,” the airline said in a statement.It added that the flight carried 129 passengers and six crew members. IndiGo has already rebooked all 129 passengers to Bangkok on other airlines and initiated rebooking of all passengers on the flight from Bangkok back to. IndiGo will provide accommodation to passengers as required, it said. Low-cost carrier operations have been hampered in the last the few days due to cancellation of flights. On February 10, the airline had said that due to hailstorm in North India, around 11 flights were diverted and as a result of it the network across the country the next day was affected. It said that due to this, positioning of its crew had to be readjusted. On Sunday, many of these crew members could not report for work.
