Provisions clarified to N-E leaders: Centre

ROBINSINGH@TRIBUNE.COM

Tribune News Service

New Delhi, February 12

As authorities in Manipur imposed prohibitory orders in two districts for an indefinite period amid continued protests against the Citizenship (Amendment) Bill, the Centre today sought to allay “misplaced apprehensions” saying various provisions of the Bill have been clarified to political leaders and some Chief Ministers of northeastern states.

The Bill, which was passed in Lok Sabha in the winter session, was listed for discussion and passage in the Rajya Sabha today, but could not be taken up due to continued protest by the Opposition.

In Kolkata, West Bengal Chief Minister Mamata Banerjee questioned the necessity of the Bill, saying the Modi government wanted to “insult” people who were already citizens of India. Talking to reporters before flying to Delhi, Banerjee said the Bill would force people who were already Indian citizens to apply afresh for citizenship.

Banerjee said under the provisions of the proposed law, anyone interested in invoking it would have to first declare self “a foreigner” for six years and only then a decision would be taken on grant of citizenship.

In a written reply to the Lok Sabha earlier, Minister of State for Home Kiren Rijiju said several steps had been taken to preserve the cultural, social and linguistic identity, and the heritage of the northeastern people in the Bill.

He said the protests were due to certain “misplaced apprehensions” over the issue. The minister said the Centre had also apprised representatives of northeastern states of the steps. “Political leaders from northeastern states, including some Chief Ministers, have met the Home Minister on various issues related to northeast, including the Citizenship (Amendment) Bill. Various provisions of the Bill have been clarified to them,” Rijiju said. Rijiju’s response came on a question by Asaduddin Owaisi (AIMIM) and V Elumalai (AIADMK).

In Imphal, prohibitory orders under Section 144, CrPC, were imposed in Imphal East and Imphal West last night, officials said. Mobile Internet services were suspended indefinitely.

The Bill seeks to provide citizenship to religious minorities from Bangladesh, Pakistan and Afghanistan after six years of residence in India, instead of 12 years, which is the norm currently, even if they do not possess any document. The indigenous people fear it will endanger their livelihood and identity.
