Rules go up in smoke: Glaring lapses that killed 17 in Delhi hotel blaze

Guests at Hotel Arpit Palace in Karol Bagh woke up to a horrifying fire on Tuesday morning. (Photo: Kasif)

It was a disaster waiting to happen, and it happened! The Karol Bagh hotel in which 17 people including a child were burnt alive on Tuesday early morning had brazenly flouted building by-laws, yet possessed a no objection certificate (NoC) from the fire department.

Like the ill-fated Hotel Arpit Palace, 170 of the 320 hotels in Karol Bagh have the mandatory fire NoCs, fire department officials told Mail Today.

However, most property owners here throw caution to the wind and make illegal structural changes with impunity. After all, the NoC is renewed only once in three years-leaving enough time for hotel and restaurant owners to carry out such modifications. The changes usually go unnoticed, until things go horribly wrong like it did at Arpit Palace.

Hours after the tragedy, Chief Minister Arvind Kejriwal said his government will probe how Arpit Palace got a NoC despite flouting safety norms.

After visiting the site of the tragedy, his cabinet colleague, Health and Urban Development Minister Satyendar Jain, said, "There is a visible violation of building bylaws in the hotel. It has six storeys (ground plus four floors and one temporary floor on the terrace) instead of the permissible four."

Delhi CM Arvind Kejriwal visited the spot on Tuesday and announced Rs 5 lakh compensation to the next of kin of those killed.

Fire department officials said that the temporary floor was illegally used as an open-air restaurant. The terrace, said officials, was covered with inflammable material that led to the flames spreading like wildfire. The fire safety system was non-functional and fire alarm non-existent.

A fire department official said some used fire extinguishers were found, suggesting people trapped inside tried to douse the flames in a bid to escape.

HOLLOW DEFENCE

Delhi Hotel and Restaurant Owners' Association vice-president Balan Mani, however, claimed all rules were followed at the hotel which was constructed 25 years ago.

"The licence is issued only after an inspection. Accidents can occur in homes as well," said a nonchalant Mani.

READ | North Delhi civic body to investigate Karol Bagh hotel fire

But, the last two NoCs issued (in 2014 and 2017), lay down a stipulation that the 46-room hotel was allowed to build just "four floors with the fifth closed by a brick wall."

"The next renewal of the NoC is due in December 2020, three years after the last one was issued," said Rajender Atwal, additional divisional officer, Delhi Fire Services.

Photo: Kasif

OTHER DANGER SPOTS

The flouting of rules and the utter disregard for safety is not confined to the busy commercial centre of Karol Bagh alone where proximity to the New Delhi Railway station has led to a mushrooming of guest houses which have been illegally converted into hotels, over the years.

From the crowded alleys of Hauz Khas, popular with the city's youth, to the back-to-back restaurants in upscale Khan Market, the capital's congested neighbourhoods are a tinderbox.

In July 2018, Mail Today had reported how lack of adequate emergency exit routes, cramped seating inside restaurants and narrow lanes leave Hauz Khas and Khan Market totally ill-prepared to fight any fire tragedy. Only four restobars in each of the two markets had fire NoCs then.

LEGAL, ON PAPER

As per data available with the Fire Services department, close to 22,000 buildings in the National Capital Region have mandatory NoCs from the fire department. These include 1,540 out of the Capital's 2,000 hotels and guest houses.

"Generally, poor quality material is used for unauthorised construction -- which is mostly inflammable. The owners use such material because it doesn't cost much to demolish these... if caught by civic authorities," says AK Sharma, former director, Delhi Fire Services.

To bend the clearance norms, many bar owners reduce the seating capacity to less than 50, but accommodate hundreds of visitors across multiple storeys.

"Khan Market has 40 restobars while Hauz Khas Village has 23. Of the total 57 outlets, only eight are equipped for firefighting," said a fire department official, not wanting to be identified.

In September 2017, the Delhi High Court, while referring to the poor emergency and fire safety preparedness of Hauz Khas Village, termed the area a "ticking time bomb".

LOGISTICAL NIGHTMARE

AK Sharma said NoCs of most of the buildings are pending for want of inspections owing to a staff crunch in the fire department.

As things stand, of the 3,623 sanctioned posts in the Delhi Fire Service, 1,741 are vacant. "We are working in 50% of the requisite strength. As a result, we take so much time to inspect the buildings," said a fire official.

PREVIOUS INFERNOS

Tuesday's mishap was perhaps the worst in the Capital since June 13, 1997 when 59 people were killed and more than 100 injured after a fire broke out at Uphaar theatre during the screening of the Bollywood hit 'Border'.

On February 7, 2019 patients and staff at Noida's Metro Hospital and Heart Institute had to be evacuated after a major fire.

On January 20, 2018, 10 women and seven men were charred to death in a fire that broke out at a firecracker unit in northwest Delhi's Bawana industrial area. Each time there is a fire, the Aam Aadmi Party government pins the blame on the Municipal Corporation.

Party spokesperson Saurabh Bharadwaj tweeted on Tuesday: "Will Delhi ever see a commissioner of MCD or chief of fire being suspended for such huge loss of innocent human lives? What a rotten system of governance where all powers rest with L-G who has zero accountability."

The North Delhi Municipal Corporation, however, has ordered a probe into the fire suggesting the same building had faced intermittent partial demolition or other civic action under the Delhi Municipal Corporation Act for unauthorised constructions.

"The inquiry should be concluded within three days, and inquiry report be sent to me by Friday," read the order of Varsha Joshi, Commissioner, North Delhi Municipal Corporation.

On Tuesday evening the police detained two officials, including the general manager of Arpit Palace Hotel.

-With inputs from Ajay Kumar, Priyanka Sharma and Kanika Mehta in New Delhi

READ MORE | Karol Bagh hotel's emergency exits were locked: Alphons on fire tragedy that killed 17

ALSO WATCH | Massive fire at Delhi hotel, people jump off building to save life
