Bengaluru- Bangkok Indigo flight makes emergency landing in Myanmar

More than 100 passengers were inconvenienced on Tuesday after a Bangkok-bound flight leaving from Kempegowda International Airport in Bengaluru had to make an emergency landing at the Yangon International Airport in Myanmar. The Indigo 6E 075 flight having 129 passengers on-board had reported an oil pressure warning in one of its engines which forced the pilots to take the step following a delay of two hours at the time of departure.

Indigo in a statement said, “An IndiGo flight 6E075, operating Bangalore-Bangkok route experienced an oil pressure warning on one of its engines. The aircraft is an A320 aircraft powered by V2500 engine. Our pilot followed the laid down procedure and landed the aircraft safely in Yangoon,”

“The affected engine is currently being investigated and the further course of action will be determined accordingly,” IndiGo added. However, it also said the snag was not noticed in the aircraft during an earlier flight.

While alternative arrangements were made to take the 129 passengers from Yangon to Bangkok, those on the Bengaluru-bound flight from Bangkok were left stranded. Indigo cancelled the Bangkok-Bengaluru flight leaving more than 50 passengers waiting with no other direct flights available to leave for Bengaluru.

The airline, further stated, “IndiGo has already rebooked all 129 passengers to Bangkok on other airlines and initiated rebooking of all the passengers on the flight from Bangkok back to Bangalore. IndiGo will provide accommodation to passengers as required.”

While Indigo claimed that it had made all necessary arrangements, passengers complained they were given a raw deal.

Meanwhile, the airline is suffering a shortage of pilots which have led to the cancellation of more than 30 of its flights without or little notice affecting passengers. Passengers have alleged that the disruption of its services is forcing them to buy last minute alternative arrangements at exorbitant prices.

TNM had earlier reported how 180 passengers of Indigo Airlines flying from Hyderabad to Lucknow were delayed for over six hours at the Hyderabad Shamshabad Airport on Saturday after a pilot skipped duty.
