Kota Double Murder Case, Congress Demands Resignation of BJP ZP Member Raghavendra

Kota Double Murder Case, Congress Demands Resignation of BJP ZP Member Raghavendra

Udupi: “If any person is killed anywhere, BJP members immediately visit the place inquire about the religion of the victim first and then protest. But it is unfortunate that the same BJP is trying to close the Kota double murder case. Today the BJP’s double standard has been exposed”, said former minister Vinay Kumar Sorake.

He was speaking after participating in a protest held by the Block Congress in Kota on February 11 to demand the resignation of BJP ZP member Raghavendra Kanchan who was arrested in the Kota double murder case.

The murdered Bharat and Yathish were not involved in any illegal activities. They had a helping nature and were always ready to help anyone in need. It is sad that they were brutally murdered, we strongly condemn it. BJP is trying to close the case to rescue their Zilla panchayat member Raghavendra Kanchan.

There is no need for another example of which party those murderers belong to. When Paresh Mesta was murdered BJP demanded CBI inquiry but today no one knows the status of the inquiry. In the death of every Hindu Youth like Praveen Poojary, Vinayaka Baliga, Harish Poojary Bantwal the BJP’s involvement has been openly exposed. The Congress party will fight across the district to give justice to Yathish and Bharath’s family. We will demand the government to give compensation for the families of the deceased.

The arrested Zilla Panchayat member is involved in many criminal activities in the Kota region. When BJP leader Kota Srinivas Poojary became a minister, the same Zilla panchayat member had pelted stones at Poojary’s government car. When a person of a party is involved in a murder case, it is the duty of that party to remove that person from any post in the party. The elected ZP member is representing the BJP and the party is silent in the case. The BJP should seek his resignation immediately, Sorake demanded.

Addressing the protesters Udupi District Congress vice-president Kishan Hegde Kolkebail said that, if anyone dies anywhere immediately our MP Shobha Karandlaje will say that he is our person. When Yathish and Bharath were murdered, Karandlaje forgot that they too were Hindus. The MP should come out and answer to the people on the arrest of her own party Zilla Panchayat member, he said.

AICC member Amrith Shenoy, District BJP president Janardhan Tonse, Congress leaders Rakesh Malli, Gopal Bhandary, Thimma Poojary, Vikas Hegde and others also spoke on the occasion.

Congress district vice president Prakyath Shetty, Congress district Minority committee vice president Derrick D’Souza, RGPRS district Co-ordinator Roshni Oliver and others were present.
