Chhattisgarh Forms Panels to Address Illegal Arrests, Threats to Media Freedom

New Delhi: Retired Supreme Court judge, Justice A.K. Patnaik will soon head a commission which will look into allegations of police atrocities and illegal detentions in Chhattisgarh in the name of fighting Maoists.

According to Indian Express, the state’s recently-elected Congress government is set to announce the said commission as well as a panel to address the challenges facing the press. The latter – headed by another former Supreme Court judge, Justice Aftab Alam – will work towards forming a bill aimed at reinforcing the freedom of speech and expression of the media in Chhattisgarh.

Sources told the daily that Justice Patnaik, who retired from the apex court in June 2014, has given his “in principle” approval to head the one-man body to look into illegal arrests – especially of tribals – in the state.

The commission will be assisted by local journalists, lawyers, police officials as well as civil society members.

Also read: The Congress Has a Chance to Redeem Itself in Chhattisgarh

As per an official, it’s all too common for unnamed tribals to be picked up and jailed for “an indefinite time” whenever someone is arrested and charged for being a Maoist. Due to lack of evidence, most cases collapse in courts but cause harassment to tribals.

The new commission will thus investigate such cases to help release the wrongly accused.

Apart from illegal arrests, curbs on media freedom is another issue facing the state. In his Republic Day address, the state chief minister Bhupesh Baghel had acknowledged that freedom of expression is in danger. “Freedom of expression is the first condition of democracy and therefore, the state government has started drafting journalists protection law in support of a free press,” he said.

Also read: Journalists in Bastar Are Still Waiting for Change

While the previous government also made several promises to improve the conditions, reporters in the state face threats, violence and arrests on a regular basis, especially in the Bastar region. The previous state government had also formed a committee dedicated to scribes – to specifically look into grievances of the reporters and ensure that no cases are lodged against journalists out of malice. However, nothing came of that panel.

The Wire previously reported on the state of media in Chhattisgarh where journalists are often arrested on allegations of being Maoist supporters. Bastar jails are the most overcrowded in the country, and prisoners are subjected to inhuman conditions.

Apart from journalists, activists working in the region have also been falsely accused. Most recently, the state police dropped charges against Delhi University professor Nandini Sundar and five others – almost three years after charging them with murder.
