Will fight Congress in Bengal but united at national level to fight BJP, says Mamata Banerjee

NEW DELHI: West Bengal chief minister Mamata Banerjee on Wednesday said that while Congress and Trinamool Congress will contest against each other in the state, they will fight together at the national level against BJP.Opposition leaders gathered on Wednesday for the third time in less than a month in a show of unity and against Prime Minister Narendra Modi and the BJP on the last day of 16th Lok Sabha.The statement came hours after Banerjee expressed disappointment at the Congress leadership for allowing party MP from the state Adhir Ranjan Chowdhury to attack TMC over Saradha chit fund scam in Lok Sabha while UPA chairperson Sonia Gandhi was seated in the House.“We are accusing each other… but we are friends,” Sonia Gandhi told Banerjee, according to sources. To this, the TMC chief is learnt to have responded with: “I will remember this.”Rahul Gandhi was also present at a meeting of opposition party leaders held at NCP leader Sharad Pawar’s residence on Wednesday after the mega rally at Delhi's Jantar Mantar.Congress has been apparently upset with TMC for having poached Congress MP Mausam Noor.Banerjee said at the rally, “any fight with Congress will remain in the state. At the national level, we will fight together, this I am saying from the heart. For greater interest of the country, I am ready to sacrifice my life, my party. I am ready to sacrifice everything."“We tell Congress if you are strong in Chhattisgarh , Madhya Pradesh and Rajasthan, you should fight there. But where we are strong, don't let BJP win. I am used to fighting BJP, CPM and Congress because, in Bengal, these three parties fight together. Even if we make an understanding, they don't transfer votes. I am used to this. I am not scared. How much ever they fight, I will get 42 out of 42,” she added.Banerjee appealed to all opposition parties to play to their strengths and not cut into each others' votes. She also asked them to ensure that they get all the seats in the states they are strong in.Banerjee, who arrived in Delhi on Tuesday met RJD's Misa Bharti, BSP Satish Mishra, SP's Jaya Bachchan and Dimple Yadav in her chamber in Parliament House on Wednesday morning.
