Two more of diesel theft gang nabbed at Ghatkesar

Hyderabad: The Rachakonda police today arrested two more members of a 12-man gang, which was pilfering diesel from the fuel pipeline of oil companies in Keesara here last month. The sleuths also recovered a cash of Rs 4.3 lakh from their possession. It may be mentioned here that on January 17, the CCS sleuths of Malkajgiri, along with Keesara police had arrested four gangsters and recovered a cash of Rs 90,40,000 and 1,20,000 litre diesel from them.

While the police were hunting for the remaining gangsters, the police got information about the absconding offenders and arrested Sarvar Shaik alias Sajju, 52, of Mumbai and Suresh Kumar Prajapathi, 38, of Navi Mumbai, driver-cum-owner of a tanker on Wednesday morning at Ghatkesar crossroads.

Police said Sarvar Shaik helped them in acquiring the lease land scene of offence and Suresh Kumar Prajapathi disposed the stolen diesel in Maharashtra State.

According to the police, Hafeez, Jiyahul Chand Shaik alias Chedda Mohd Abrar and Srinivas became friends in Mumbai and hatched a plan to commit theft of diesel from the running pipeline, which leads to Cherlapally from Ghatkesar. As per their plan, they took land (scene of offence) on lease in the name of Hafeez Aziz Chowdari, who got married with one woman of Bahadurpura of Hyderabad, from land owner Mahender Goud. They constructed one shed with a compound wall and started making tunnel path from inside of the shed to the main running pipeline of the diesel.

They drilled a hole to the pipeline and fixed a clamp with valve along pipe and also fixed electrical motor from the hole and the same was connected to the tanker and committed theft of Diesel of BPCL 84,365 KL and IOCL 46,236 KL. Total 1,30,601 Kilo Liters diesel about seven tankers. Accused Srinivas was main investor and one of the partners.

Other accused Jayakrishna, Srikanth, Vasu and Sunil engaged two tankers and disposed off the stolen diesel. Accused driver Naresh Reddy disposed the diesel in Warangal, Bachupally, Burgula, Koyalkonda. Suresh Kumar Prajapath disposed of diesel in Maharashtra. Jiyahul Chand Shaik, Sunil Anil, Vasu, Srikanth and Naresh Reddy are still absconding.

[source_without_link]NSS[/source_without_link]
