Mamata to fight with Cong, Left at national level

New Delhi (India), Feb 14 (ANI): West Bengal Chief Minister and TMC leader Mamata Banerjee on Wednesday committed to fight unitedly with Congress and the CPM at the national level, against the BJP in the upcoming Lok Sabha polls.

"In the coming days we will fight unitedly. Our fight with Congress and CPM will be in the state. At the national level we will fight together," Mamata said on Wednesday.

"Let them fight against me, I don't mind. For interest of the nation, I'm ready to sacrifice my life and party," she said at 'Save the Constitution' public rally here organised by the Aam Aadmi Party. The rally comes three weeks after the TMC leader hosted Opposition leaders in a similar show of strength on January 19.

Mamata also said that the “expiry date” of Prime Minister Narendra Modi was over with Parliament having its last day on Wednesday before the upcoming Lok Sabha polls.

At the AAP opposition rally at Jantar-Mantar in the national capital she shared the dais with her Delhi counterpart Arvind Kejriwal, Andhra Pradesh CM N Chandrababu Naidu and other prominent leaders from the opposition.

“Today was the last day of the Prime Minister Narendra Modi in Lok Sabha. The expiry date is over and within one month the Election Commission will declare the date of elections and code of conduct would be enforced. Once it happens then he will not be able to do whatever he feels like because Election Commission would overtake,” said Mamata Banerjee.

She also said that the privacy is under grave threat from the Prime Minister Narendra Modi as her phone is under surveillance at the behest of Prime Minister who allegedly “trusts no one”.

“My phone is under surveillance, phones of media persons are also under surveillance, phones of political leaders including those from BJP, IAS, IPS, Joint Secretaries and all are under surveillance as he (Narendra Modi) trusts no one,” said Banerjee.

She said that regional parties are not weak and the regional players can defeat BJP in their own states leading to its eventual defeat in Lok Sabha.

“Regional parties are not weak. The AAP can get all the seven Lok Sabha seats in Delhi and none should fall into their (BJP’s) bag. Similarly, in Andhra Pradesh N Chandrababu Naidu will do his best, in West Bengal TMC will do its best while in UP SP-BSP,” she said. (ANI)
