BJP implementing its agenda through Guv: Mehbooba

BJP implementing its agenda through Guv: Mehbooba

Warns Delhi against playing with fire

SRINAGAR, Feb 13: Peoples Democratic Party (PDP) President, Mehbooba Mufti today warned New Delhi to stop from playing with fire by “fiddling” with the Muslim majority character of Jammu and Kashmir.

Addressing a news conference at her Gupkar residence here, the former Chief Minister said the decisions taken by the Centre through Governor Satayapal Malik under a hidden agenda are aimed at creating divisions in the state which may further deteriorate the situation.

“I warn the centre to stop playing with fire and accept that Jammu and Kashmir is a Muslim majority state. It seems that centre by creating divisions on communal and regional lines wants to change the Muslim majority character of the Jammu and Kashmir,” Mehbooba said.

She said Governor Satyapal Malik’s recent decision of announcing Ladakh as separate division has pushed the people of Kargil to the wall. She said people continue to hit streets in Kargil district for the fourth day as people feel discriminated.

Mehbooba alleged that Muslim population of the state is being purposely alienated by such taking sensitive decisions regarding Jammu and Kashmir.

Mehbooba, while demanding separate divisions for Pir-Panjal and Chenab valley, said people in these have areas also started taking to the roads in protest, although minor in scale.

“Pir-Panjal and Chenab valley should be given equal status so as to stop people from hitting the streets. Since Kargil is closer to Srinagar, headquarter for newly created division should be setup on rotational basis like that of Darbar Move,” she added.

PDP President said that Centre’s attempts to create divisions in Jammu and Kashmir on regional and communal lines are aimed at fomenting communal riots between Shia and Sunni, Kashmiri and Punjabi.

She said that despite warnings, Centre went on with its decisions of creating divisions in Jammu and Kashmir, ignoring Pir-Panjal and Chenab valley.

Mehbooba said that like power projects, centre also wants to grab water resources of Jammu and Kashmir. She said seven power projects were handed over to the centre by the then CM Farooq Abdullah and his son Omar Abdullah who was Minister in BJP led NDA government.

“Centre says water will be supplied to Punjab, Haryana and Rajasthan in case the level of Ujj River exceeds. I stopped many such things to happen during my tenure as CM. State has already suffered losses due to Indus Water Treaty and we wanted that losses to be equally compensated by the centre,” Mehbooba said, adding that now Rattle power project too is being handed over to the centre.

Replying to a question about some reports that she will enter into pre-poll alliance with any party ahead of upcoming election to keep BJP at bay she said, “I don’t want to comment on comments. It was source based media report and I cannot say how authentic the report was”.

Regarding letter shot by one of the PDP leaders to GoI demanding return of the mortal remains of Afzal Guru to his family she said, PDP's stand on Afzal Guru is intact.

“We demanded that Guru should not be hanged and also wrote a letter to the President of India seeking clemency for Afzal Guru much before his execution. Our stand in this regard stands clear,” she added.

Mehbooba while regretting the recent incident between stranded Kashmiri passengers and local students said there are elements from both sides who wanted to create an atmosphere of violence.

“There are mischievous elements from both sides including those who pelted stones and those who chanted slogans. I would like to say that people of Jammu are secular despite the fact some forces want to add fuel to the fire,” she added.

Mehbooba also extended gratitude to the Sikh community who served stranded passengers in this time of difficulty. She also thanked to Kashmiri people who arranged free kitchen for stranded passengers and drivers from Jammu at Qazigund.
