NESO warns Centre against anti-NE policies

SHILLONG: Soon after the CAB lapsed in Rajya Sabha, the North East Students Organisation (NESO) has warned the Union Government not to adopt, implement policies which are detrimental to the interest of the indigenous people of North East.

“NESO would like to give a strong warning to the Government of India not to adopt, implement policies which are detrimental to the interest of the indigenous people of North East.” Chairman of the organisation, Samuel Jyrwa said.

NESO comprising different NGOs from the region congratulated the entire indigenous people of North East as through their united and concerted efforts, the Centre was not able to table the Citizenship (Amendment) Bill 2016 on the floor of the Rajya Sabha.

“NESO would like to thank all the component organisations who have worked very hard and sacrificed a lot to oppose this draconian Bill, on this occasion, it is very imperative to also thank the different state governments of the North East who have taken a bold stand on this issue, notably Meghalaya government led by Conrad Sangma, the government of Mizoram led by Zoramthanga, different students’ unions, social organisations and women’s groups,” NESO said.

The organisation also thanked Nitish Kumar, Chief Minister of Bihar, as his party the JD(U) has even taken a resolution in its national executive council to oppose the CAB.

The organisation also said it cannot forget all the people who were injured during this movement especially in Tripura, Manipur and Assam.

“We would like to take this opportunity to call this momentous occasion as a ‘moral victory’ for the indigenous people of North East. We achieved success in stalling the Bill only because of the united continuous movement of the people. This also goes on to show that the Government of India will not concede to our demands but we have to fight and struggle for the protection and survival of our indigenous people of North East,” the NESO statement added.

KSU planned surprise dharna

The Khasi Students’ Union which had planned a surprise dharna against the passing of the bill, took out a victory procession through different areas of the city.

KSU general secretary Donald Thabah, while thanking the leaders of NESO for aggressively campaigning in New Delhi against the bill, asserted that the Union would continue to oppose any bill which is detrimental to the existence of indigenous community.

Admitting that the Union had planned a surprise dharna in the city if the bill would have been passed, Thabah added that the bill was not passed in Rajya Sabha probably because of the fact that the BJP government understood that they are not in majority.

“In addition, the protests here in North East put the BJP on backfoot,” he said while stating that it is a proud moment for the NGOs of the North East who have proved that they can fight against such draconian laws.

The KSU leader, however, maintained that though the bill has been stalled, the people of North East should always be ready as such bill which are detrimental to the wellbeing of the North East can be brought again by any government.

When asked about the idea of issuing work permits to the residents of Bangladesh to come and work here in Meghalaya, Thabah said that the organisation would oppose any bill which is a threat to the local Khasi community.

He also questioned the idea behind issuing work permits to Bangladeshis saying there is no dearth of labourers here in Meghalaya.

CoHSO wants ILP, NRC

The Confederation of Hynniewtrep Social Organizations (CoHSO) reminded the state government to not rest on its laurels though the Citizenship Amendment Bill, 2016 was not tabled.

It also reminded the government to implement Inner Line Permit (ILP) and National Register of Citizens (NRC).

“As it is, if the President of India does not call for a Joint Parliament Session, the CAB is lapsed. This is the victory of the Hynniewtrep people and the North East as a whole,” chairman of CoHSO, Robert Kharjahrin said in a statement.

Expressing delight, the organisation also extended gratitude to all who opposed the bill tooth and nail.

He added that the victory against the CAB and the BJP is only half the battle won and said, “The battle is to preserve the culture and tradition of the Hynniewtrep people.”

Synjuk jubilant

The Synjuk ki Nongsynshar Shnong ka Bri U Hynniewtrep has expressed happiness that the Citizenship Amendment Bill was not passed.

The Synjuk thanked the chief minister for taking the matter seriously and also members of the North East Students’ Organisation (NESO).
