AAP versus Delhi LG: Arvind Kejriwal says verdict against democracy, BJP says will sue for contempt

Soon after the Supreme Court (SC) pronounced its verdict to end the ongoing power tussle in the national capital, Delhi Chief Minister Arvind Kejriwal said the verdict was unfortunate and against democracy.

"We respect the apex court but this is injustice to the people. What kind of democracy is this? How can Delhi progress if the government is forced to sleep at L-G's office and protest to get developmental work done," he said.

The AAP chief went on to say that it is very difficult for a government to function if it cannot transfer its own officers.

"If a government can't even transfer its officers, how is it supposed to function? The party that has 67 seats doesn't have the rights but the party who won 3 seats has those rights," he said.

Earlier in the day, the Supreme Court ruled many aspects in favour of the Centre including control of Delhi's anti-corruption bureau (ACB) and also on setting up inquiry commission under the Commission of Inquiry Act, 1952.

The two-judge bench comprising Justice AK Sikri and AK Bhushan have referred the matter on control of services to a larger Supreme Court bench as it is one of the most crucial demands of the Kejriwal government.

On the other hand, the Bharatiya Janata Party (BJP) has slammed Arvind Kejriwal for holding a press briefing after the top court's verdict. BJP spokesperson Sambit Patra said the party may file a contempt petition against Arvind Kejriwal.

"Kejriwal has been badly defeated. AAP is abusing and accusing party. Today Kejriwal didn't address a PC, he in fact dealt a contempt of SC We are considering moving a contempt application against Kejriwal," he said.

"Look at the language Kejriwal has used against apex court! He is calling decision unconstitutional. You are attacking democracy and the justices of the SC," he said.

Meanwhile, AAP has not given up hope even after the Centre was given an upper hand in the tug of war going on in Delhi.

Rahul Mehra, representing the Delhi government in the matter said the order was a setback to the people of the city and not the government.

"I don't think it is a setback for Delhi government, it is a setback for people of Delhi, a clearer verdict should have been pronounced," he said. He also said the Delhi government will fight the legal battle.
