2019 Lok Sabha Elections: ‘BJP to win around 260 seats, Narendra Modi to be PM again’

File picture: Prime Minister Narendra Modi | Photo Credit: IANS

Nagpur: Union Minister of State for Social Justice Ramdas Athawale on Thursday said the BJP would win approximately 260 seats in the 2019 Lok Sabha Elections and Narendra Modi will once again become the prime minister of India.

When asked if he would like to see Union minister Nitin Gadkari or Narendra Modi as the next PM, the Union minister said since the BJP will contest the upcoming elections under Modi's leadership, the latter should get the opportunity.

"Nitin Gadkari is a very good friend of mine, but Narendra Modi will become the next prime minister. Gadkari is a very active minister in the union cabinet. But for now, Modi will become the prime minister...Let's see what happens after five years," Athawale told the media.

"Now, elections will be fought under the leadership of Narendra Modi, and hence he should get the opportunity. After that, if Nitin Gadkari's name comes up then it is well and good," the minister added.

Athawale further said that the BJP will grab around 260 seats.

"As per our analysis, even if there is a loss of around 15-20 seats in Uttar Pradesh, BJP's seat tally will increase in the North East. The party will also do good in Mamata's West Bengal, where Communists and Congress are not that strong anymore," he said.

"There will be a close fight between Mamata (Banerjee's TMC) and the BJP. Similarly, Nitish Kumar and BJP's alliance will get good seats in Bihar. I think even if there will be some reduction and increase in the number of seats at some places, we will win the 2019 elections," he said.

In the 2014 Lok Sabha Elections, the BJP had won 282 out of 543 seats.

The minister also commented on Samajwadi Party leader Mulayam Singh Yadav’s remarks in Lok Sabha when he heaped praise on the PM.

"Perhaps Mulayam Singh did not agree with Akhilesh's decision of going with Mayawati with whom Mulayam Singh had huge differences."

"That's why he said his 'mann ki baat' (straight from the heart) in the Lok Sabha. By appreciating Narendra Modi, Mulayam Singh has brought the truth before the people of the country. The alliance between Mayawati and Akhilesh won't affect the BJP much in the elections," he said.
