'Injustice on the People of Delhi': Arvind Kejriwal on Delhi vs Centre Verdict

New Delhi: Evidently upset with the Supreme Court verdict denying his elected government the powers it wants to efficiently run the administration, Delhi chief minister Arvind Kejriwal termed the order “extremely unfortunate” and an “injustice on the people of Delhi.”

While noting that his government would explore all legal options, he also urged the people to vote for his party in the upcoming Lok Sabha elections, so that the Aam Aadmi Party (AAP) could get these powers through parliament.

‘No power for party that won 67 of 70 seats’

“We respect the Supreme Court and hold it in high esteem, but the judgment is gross injustice with Delhi and its people. Delhi’s citizens gave 67 out of 70 seats to elect a government. Today’s judgment says that this elected government does not have the right to transfer officers. So the question arises – if a government cannot even transfer its officers then how will it function?” Kejriwal asked during a press conference soon after the judgement was pronounced.

Wondering how the government could work when its hands were tied, he said, “If an officer does not work, if he cannot be replaced, then how will the government work. Today’s judgment says that the party in government does not have the right to transfer its officers, but the party which won three out of 70 seats will decide on the transfer and postings of all the officers in Delhi.”

Kejriwal also said that the judgment was questionable. “It is the Supreme Court’s own judgement which says the basic structure of the constitution cannot be tampered with. The biggest basic structure is democracy, but if the government elected with such a big majority does not have any power, then how will it function. What kind of democracy and order is this?”

Also read: Delhi vs Centre: Supreme Court Bench Split on Control of Services

‘All powers placed in hands of opposition BJP’

He also wondered why the judgement placed all the powers in the hands of the opposition. “If all the powers are given to the opposition parties, then they will appoint officers who will not let the government function. We have been enduring this for the last four years.”

Talking about his cabinet colleague Manish Sisodia, he said the minister’s work in the field of education and schools has been lauded world over. But, he asked, what would happen if an education secretary is appointed who impedes the minister’s work?

Similarly, he said Satyendra Jain’s work as health minister in setting up mohalla clinics received praise all over, but questioned if this would be possible if an officer is put in place who prevents the clinics from coming up, or stops the distribution of medicines and tests.

‘Why is the Anti Corruption Branch no longer under the elected government?’

Kejriwal, who ensured the meteoric rise of the Aam Aadmi Party on an anti-corruption plank, wondered why the Anti Corruption Branch was no longer under the Delhi government, when it was for the last 40 years. “So, if someone were to allege that an officer was corrupt, then what will I be able to do? In such a scenario, would I tell the BJP leaders to look into the matter? This when all this is being done by the BJP.”

Yet, Kejriwal lamented, all the powers have today been vested in the BJP instead of the party which was elected by the people, and felt that “this judgment is not only against the people of Delhi, it is also against the constitution and democracy.”

‘All legal options will be explored’

He said all legal options would be explored, including filing a review petition.

“But,” he said, “now the solution to this issue was just one… and the key to it lies with the people of Delhi.”

He added, “I want to tell the people of Delhi that Kejriwal is a very small man. In four years, we and our ministers have fought to get work done. But, if to get the files cleared, he [Kejriwal] has to fast for 10 days, how will the government work… how will Delhi progress?” referring to the fast he and his ministerial colleagues held at the Lieutenant General’s office last year.

Urges people to vote for AAP

The Aam Aadmi Party leader also made a political appeal. He urged the people: “Do not vote in the upcoming Lok Sabha elections to elect a prime minister. The only solution is that Delhi should get full statehood. People of Delhi should get this right. Delhi government should have all the powers like the other states. You should elect AAP in all the seven seats of Delhi. We will fight in Parliament and compel whichever government comes to power to give full statehood for Delhi.”

Along with the Centre, Kejriwal also attacked three-time Delhi chief minister and now Congress unit president Sheila Dikshit. His attack came in response to her recent charge that in his four-year rule, Kejriwal has destroyed Delhi. Kejriwal retorted by saying the powers he is seeking for the capital city may be needed by others tomorrow.

Also read: Mahagathbandhan Reaches Delhi as AAP Hosts Gathering of Opposition Leaders

Tells Dikshit ‘short term politics’ is not good

On Dikshit welcoming the Supreme Court order, he said, “I would only make one appeal to her – sometimes when the issues is really big, such statements are not good for short term politics. We do not have even 10% of the powers she enjoyed as chief minister. Can she say she did not have the power to transfer officers? She had all the powers. Can she say she did not have the ACB? She had that too.”

Apart from this, he said, that for the ten years she was chief minister, her party also had a government at the Centre – whose benefits she enjoyed. Despite all this, Kejriwal claimed his government did ten times more work in four years than what her government did in 15.

BJP accuses Kejriwal of threatening SC, committing contempt of court

Meanwhile, the BJP accused Kejriwal of trying to threaten and intimidate the apex court through his press conference. “Today Kejriwal did not address a press conference, he committed contempt of court,” claimed party spokesperson Sambit Patra.

He insisted Kejriwal’s assertion that the court order was wrong and that the public had the key to rectify it amounted to instigating the cadre and people to attack the Supreme Court.

Patra also accused Kejriwal of doublespeak – saying that on the one hand he claims to have run government efficiently for the past four years, and on the other that the Centre was not letting his government work.
