Pulwama attack: India blames Pak for terror strike that killed 44 CRPF men; Rajnath Singh in J&K on Friday

Army soldiers near the site of suicide bomb attack at Lathepora Awantipora in Pulwama district of south Kashmir where CRPF jawans were martyred on Thursday | Photo Credit: PTI

Pulwama attack on CRPF convoy: Home Minister Rajnath Singh will be visiting Pulwama, the site where Jaish e Mohammed (JeM) militants targetted the CRPF convoy in Kashmir's Awantipura, killing 44 security personnel. A team of National Investigation Agency (NIA) will also be visiting Pulwama and will get involved in the investigation of the incident. Meanwhile, the Cabinet Committee on Security (CCS), the highest decision-making body of the government is scheduled to meet on Wednesday morning to decide a course of action in relation to the incident.

The international community including the US, Russia, Sri Lanka, Nepal, Bangladesh condemned the attack and expressed solidarity with India. In an official statement, the Ministry of External Affairs (MEA) blamed Pakistan for the attack and said that JeM founder Maulana Masood Azhar has been given the freedom to target India. In a statement issued late Thursday evening, Pakistan government said that the Pulwama attack was "a matter of grave concern". "We strongly reject any insinuation by elements in the Indian media and government that seek to link the attack to Pakistan without investigations," Pakistan government said in a statement reported by news agency PTI.

In a strongly worded warning to Pakistan, Home Minister Rajnath Singh said that the attack would be given a 'strong reply'. "The attack was carried out by Pakistan backed Jaish-e-Mohammed. A strong reply will be given and I assure the people of the country this," Singh told news agency ANI. PM Narendra Modi, who took to Twitter to subtly warn that the 'sacrifices of our brave security personnel shall not go in vain'.

"Attack on CRPF personnel in Pulwama is despicable. I strongly condemn this dastardly attack. The sacrifices of our brave security personnel shall not go in vain. The entire nation stands shoulder to shoulder with the families of the brave martyrs. May the injured recover quickly," he said in a tweet. Later, he also spoke to the Home Minister and took stock of the situation.

Meanwhile, Rajnath Singh and PM Modi spoke to National Security Advisor Ajit Doval about the attack. Union Home Secretary Rajiv Gauba decided to cut short his visit to Bhutan and return to New Delhi in light of the attack. Earlier, in a statement released to local news agency GNS, JeM claimed responsibility for the attack and the attacker was identified as one Adil Ahmad from Kakapora in Pulwama. The opposition leaders, as well as the international community, joined hands in condemning the attack.

"We strongly condemn today's attack in J&K's Pulwama. We express our deepest condolences to the families of those who lost their lives & to the people & Govt of India. We wish a speedy recovery to injured & call for those behind the attack to be brought to justice," the United Nations said in a statement.
