Pulwama attack: Stop supporting terrorists, India warns Pakistan on attack

New Delhi: In the wake of the horrific terror attack in Pulwama in the Kashmir valley, India lashed out at Pakistan, saying that the “heinous and despicable act has been perpetrated by Jaish-e-Mohammed (JeM), a Pakistan-based and supported terrorist organisation proscribed by the United Nations and other countries” and further demanding that “all members of the international community support the proposal to list terrorists, including JeM Chief Masood Azhar, as a designated terrorist under the 1267 Sanctions Committee of the UN Security Council”. Significantly, China has been blocking India’s move at the UN so far to get Masood Azhar banned by the UN. Pressure is bound to mount on Beijing to reverse its stand.

Even as condemnations of the horrific terror attack poured in from foreign countries including the US, Russia, France as well as neighbouring countries such as Bhutan, Sri Lanka and the Maldives, New Delhi “demanded that Pakistan stop supporting terrorists and terror groups operating from their territory and dismantle the infrastructure operated by terrorist outfits to launch attacks in other countries.”’

In a statement, the MEA said, “The Government of India condemns in the strongest possible terms the cowardly terrorist attack on our brave security forces in Pulwama, Jammu & Kashmir earlier today (14 February 2019). This heinous and despicable act has been perpetrated by Jaish-e-Mohammed, a Pakistan-based and supported terrorist organisation proscribed by the United Nations and other countries. This terror group is led by the international terrorist Masood Azhar, who has been given full freedom by Government of Pakistan to operate and expand his terror infrastructure in territories under the control of Pakistan and to carry out attacks in India and elsewhere with impunity.”

The MEA added, “The Government of India is firmly and resolutely committed to take all necessary measures to safeguard national security. We are equally resolved to fight against the menace of terrorism. We demand that Pakistan stop supporting terrorists and terror groups operating from their territory and dismantle the infrastructure operated by terrorist outfits to launch attacks in other countries. We strongly reiterate our appeal to all members of the international community to support the proposal to list terrorists, including JeM Chief Masood Azhar, as a designated terrorist under the 1267 Sanctions Committee of the UNSC and to ban terrorist organisations operating from territories controlled by Pakistan. We express our sincere condolences to the family members of our fearless security personnel who have made the supreme sacrifice.”

Meanwhile, the United States Embassy said, “”The U.S. Mission in India strongly condemns today’s terrorist attack in Jammu & Kashmir. We send our heartfelt condolences to the families of the victims. The United States stands alongside India in confronting terror and defeating it.”

In a statement, Russia said, “The Embassy of the Russian Federation in the Republic of India condemns in the strongest terms the horrific terrorist attack in Kashmir’s Pulwama district, which claimed precious lives of the CRPF personnel and left numerous people injured. We denounce terrorism in all its forms and manifestations and reiterate the need to combat these inhuman acts with decisive and collective response. May we express condolences to the grieving families of the deceased and wish a speedy recovery to those injured.”
