CHRISTIANITY CRACKDOWN: Mob attacks prayer meeting - several injured as Bibles destroyed

Pakistan: Protesters gather in capital after acquittal of Asia Bibi

top stories direct to your inbox SUBSCRIBE Invalid email Sign up to receive our rundown of the day'sdirect to your inbox We use your sign-up to provide content in ways you've consented to and to improve our understanding of you. This may include adverts from us and 3rd parties based on our understanding. You can unsubscribe at any time. More info

A mob of 25 thugs stormed a small prayer gathering in India’s Uttar Pradesh state. Around 40 Christians were at a pastor’s home on the village of Chapar last Thursday. The group of Hindus subjected the Christians to verbal abuse and physical assault. Bibles and church properties were damaged with six Christians needing medical attention.

Christians attacked by Hindu extremists in India

The radicals threatened to kill the Christians if they continued to worship, according to a report by Christian Solidarity Worldwide (CSW). It comes amid a worldwide upsurge in attacks against Christians in recent years. A quarter of a billion Christians are being persecuted in countries including Afghanistan, Sudan, Sudan, Libya, North Korea, China and India, British Foreign Secretary Jeremy Hunt told a review. Asia Bibi, 54, a Pakistan Christian mum-of-five jailed for blasphemy, was acquitted in October, 2018 after eight years on death row.

The group of Hindus subjected the Christians to verbal abuse and physical assault

She was convicted in 2010 over claims she insulted the Prophet Muhammad in a row with neighbours. Britain refused a plea from her husband Ashiq Masih to give asylum to their family, who instead fled to Canada. Last month, Pakistan’s Supreme Court rejected a challenge to Ms Bibi’s acquittal. Mr Jeremy Hunt believes “post-colonial guilt” is making the UK blind to the plight of Christians around the world.

Mum-of-five Asia Bibi was on death row for eight years after being convicted of blasphemy
