Absconding Kathiriya remains invisible to cops not his supporters

SURAT: Patidar Anamat Andolan Samiti’s (PAAS) South Gujarat convener Alpesh Kathiriya is on the run after his bail was cancelled by a local court in January in a sedition case. However, he like other leaders of his organizations stays connected with his supporters through various communication mediums. The Lok Sabha elections are a couple of months away and PAAS leaders feel they must leave their imprint on the polls too.Recently, Kathiriya warned police of dire consequences in an audio message if his family and friends were harassed to trace his location. The message seems to have been shared by Kathiriya after recording it on a mobile phone and within minutes it went viral.“Alpesh Kathiriya manages to stay in touch with his supporters through various modes of communication. His intention is to keep the movement going. He is fighting against law for reservation and we are with him,” PAAS convener Dharmik Malaviya said.Malaviya and other PAAS activists have started an indefinite fast in Nana Varachha to demand bail for Kathiriya, who was arrested three years after registration of sedition case against him. Strangely, Kathiriya is actively using technology to speak to his supporters but cops are unable to nab him.Kathiriya along with Hardik Patel , Vipul Desai and Chirag Desai were booked on sedition charges at Amroli police station in October 2015. They were booked after Hardik asked one of his followers to ‘kill 2-4 cops’ on October 3.In August 2018, Ahmedabad police arrested him in a sedition case registered there and he got bail in November. Immediately after his release from Sabarmati Central Jail , he was arrested by city police. Kathiriya got bail in December 2018 in the sedition case registered at Amroli police station and another offence against him.Kathiriya was out on bail when he got involved in several conflicts with the cops. On December 28, he was booked in four offences at Varachha and Sarthana police stations. He hurled abuses at cops while in lockup and his video went viral. Later, the police approached the court requesting cancellation of his bail citing multiple criminal cases against Kathiriya while on bail. Consequently, his bail was cancelled on January 15.
