Pulwama terror attack: Jaish-e-Mohammed suicide bomber Adil Ahmad Dar revealed monstrous plans before strike

Jaish-e-Mohammed terrorist Adil Ahmad Dar posted this video before carrying out the attack on the CRPF convoy in Pulwama. | Photo Credit: Twitter

Pulwama: In a dastardly act of terrorism, banned Pakistani terror group Jaish-e-Mohammed (JeM) on Thursday killed at least 38 Central Reserve Police Force personnel in Awantipora, in Jammu and Kashmir’s Pulwama district. The attack took place after a suicide bomber in a Mahindra Scorpio car loaded with 350 kilograms of explosives rammed into a convoy carrying over 2500 CRPF troops on the Srinagar-Jammu Highway.

The terrorist, identified as Adil Ahmad Dar, was known by various aliases – from ‘Adil Ahmad Gaadi Takranewala’ to ‘Waqas Commando of Gundibagh’. The terrorist was a 22-year-old local from Pulwama’s Kakapora area who dropped out of school after class 12 in 2017 and lived barely 10 kilometres from the attack site, which clearly shows the reason why JeM chose him since his understanding of the terrain.

Just minutes after he carried out the attack, JeM released a video that was shot before Dar set out on the savagery, where he is seen brandishing rifles, grenades and magazines, and speaking about the "atrocities faced by the people of Kashmir, especially Muslims".

Also read: Pulwama terror attack LIVE UPDATES

In an inflammatory address to Kashmiris, Dar said, “The war that they can’t win with force, they are trying to win by compromising your belief. They want to mislead you from the etiquettes of Islam. They want to mislead you from the path of Islam by luring you with worldly pleasures.”

Furthermore, attacking the Indian government, he said, “Listen to me carefully you Indians, we are going to unleash such terror on you that people like you who drink the urine of cows won’t be able to contain.”

In a strongly worded warning to Pakistan, Home Minister Rajnath Singh said that the attack would be given a 'strong reply'. “The attack was carried out by Pakistan backed Jaish-e-Mohammed. A strong reply will be given and I assure the people of the country this," Singh told news agency ANI. PM Narendra Modi, who took to Twitter to subtly warn that the ‘sacrifices of our brave security personnel shall not go in vain’.

“We strongly condemn the attack in J&K’s Pulwama. We express our deepest condolences to the families of those who lost their lives and to the people and the government of India. We wish a speedy recovery to injured and call for those behind the attack to be brought to justice,” the United Nations said in a statement.
