Binky Felstead slips into a bikini on Mexican beach break with daughter India

She said goodbye to a difficult 2018 that saw her split from Josh 'JP' Patterson, the father of her 18-month-old daughter.

And Binky Felstead declared the year 'hasn't been her favourite' as she posed in a bikini for a sweet beach shot while enjoying a new year's holiday to Cabo, Mexico, with her little girl and her godfather on Monday.

The former Made In Chelsea star, 28, looked incredible as she reclined on the sand, showing off her taut tum in a Melissa Obadash bikini as she reflected on the past 12 months with her 'true angel and love of my life' India.

Reflecting: Binky Felstead declared 2018 'hasn't been her favourite' as she posed in a bikini for a beach shot while enjoying a holiday to Cabo, Mexico, with her little girl on Monday

The TV personality wrote: '2018... it’s safe to say you haven’t been my favourite year. SO BRING ON 2019!!!

'I want to say a massive thank you for all your continued support, it honestly means the [world] to me. Sending SO much love and HAPPY NEW YEAR from my true angel and love of my life, India..& I.'

Binky, real name Alexandra, tossed her hair up into a casual bun and wore large sunglasses while India seemed more interested in playing in the sand.

Earlier in the day, the brunette beauty posted another adorable picture of the mummy-daughter duo in matching blue kaftans and sunglasses with her 1.4 million followers.

Yummy mummy: The former Made In Chelsea star, 28, looked incredible as she reclined on the sand, showing off her taut tum in a Melissa Obadash bikini as she reflected on the past year

The snap showed a doting Binky gazing lovingly at her daughter as she toddled towards the camera in a pair of her very own baby Ray-Bans.

She also shared a video on her Instagram Stories telling India to 'show everyone your outfit' and added 'you're matching with mummy' when the adorable tot turned to the camera.

Binky and former co-star Josh confirmed their split in September after three years of off and on dating.

The couple were famously tumultuous during their time on Made In Chelsea, but got back together in early 2017 when they found out they were expecting India.

Twinning is winning: The TV personality posted another adorable picture of the mummy-daughter duo in matching blue kaftans and sunglasses with her 1.4 million followers

Travelling in style: Binky and India travelled out to Mexico in style, posing for a sweet snap while enjoying their business class seats

The former pair remain close, but Binky recently admitted she is 'scared' of Josh moving on with a new relationship.

Speaking to The Sun, she explained: 'It was literally a mutual decision. Things hadn’t been right for a while, but we’d kind of painted over it. I think doing that was unfair on India as well as ourselves. We can’t stick together just because we have a baby.

'Josh will find someone very quickly, and that kind of scares me. The scariest thing for me is thinking about being on my own, and how am I going to meet someone again when I have a baby? Because who wants to think about being on their own'

She added: 'Of course, hopefully one day, but I’m not there yet. I’m not even thinking about that. As long as Josh and I are in a good place together that’s all that matters, because that’s what’s perfect for India.'
