Cong endangering nation’s security: Modi

Addressing a public meeting here on Saturday, Prime Minister Narendra Modi came down heavily on the Congress.

He said after the Congress formed a coalition Government in Madhya Pradesh, the first thing it did was targeting the singing of “Vande Mataram” in the State Assembly. Congressmen also cannot tolerate him (ModI) saying Bharat Mata Ki Jai. The second thing it did was it was trying to stop the pension of those who were jailed during the Emergency. But the Bharatiya Janata Party would oppose these moves.

The Prime Minister said the Congress has found itself in a soup in the VVIP helicopter deal. The alleged middleman in the Augusta Westland helicopter deal, Christian James Michel, has been extradited to India. From newspaper reports, it has been ascertained that a letter of the concerned middlemen has exposed that he had access to the top leaders of the Congress and rubbing shoulders with them. He even had more information than the Prime Minister of India regarding the country’s defence matters and was passing on information about the Cabinet Committee of Security’s proceedings to his contacts in foreign countries. From 2004 to 2014, a conspiracy was hatched by the Congress to weaken the defence forces.

But after coming to power, the BJP Government has tried to strengthen the defence forces, the PM said.

He alleged that the Congress is endangering the security of the nation. But nobody would be spared. All those involved would be brought to book. Pointing out at the Rafale deal, he said the Congress is using Parliament for entertainment.

Modi said his Government is working for the empowerment and development of women in the country. His Government has opened the doors for women in Army, Navy and Air Force. To ensure the safety of women, his Government has brought a law which awards death penalty to those found guilty of rape of minor girls.

He added a woman, who is the Defence Minister of the country on Friday exposed the Congress’ lies about the Rafale deal in the Parliament. But the Congress wants to remove the Chowkidar.
