Watch: Uri The Surgical Strike actor Mohit Raina strongly condemns Pulwama terror attack

Mohit Raina, who made his big screen debut in Aditya Dhar's war drama Uri: The Surgical Strike, strongly condemned the terrorist attack on a Central Reserve Police Force (CRPF) convoy in Jammu and Kashmir's Pulwama district, which claimed the lives of at least 40 jawans.

ALSO READ: US condemns Pulwama terror attack, asks Pakistan to deny support to terrorists

"Jo hua hai, that was very, very sad. Bekasur jawaan humare jo apne chhuttiyaan bitaane ke baad wapas Kashmir jaa rahe the, unke saath aisa haadsa hua hai. Bohot dukhad, nindaniya hai yeh. (Our innocent soldiers were returning to Kashmir after their holidays when this incident happened. It is very sad and condemnable.) Whatever the government and the defence personnel have to do, they will do the needful. This is not right. This is really, really sad," the actor told reporters at an event last night.

Pakistan-sponsored terrorist organisation Jaish-e-Mohammed (JeM) has claimed responsibility for the worst-ever terror attack on security forces in recent times. Adil Ahmad Dar, the terrorist behind the dastardly attack, rammed his car containing 350 kg of explosives into a security convoy of 78 vehicles, each carrying around 40-45 soldiers.

Meanwhile, Prime Minister Narendra Modi warned the perpetrators of the attack that they will pay a huge price. At a launch event, he revealed that the armed forces have been given full freedom to retaliate against the attack.

"I pay tribute to soldiers who lost their lives in the Pulwama attack. Our security forces have been given full freedom. We have full faith in their bravery," Modi said.

The prime minister added, "I want to tell terror groups and their supporters that they have made a huge mistake. I want to assure the nation that those behind this attack will definitely be punished."

A grateful nation bows to the martyrs of Pulwama.



A befitting reply will be given to the perpetrators of the heinous attack and their patrons.



No force will succeed in disturbing peace, progress and stability of India. pic.twitter.com/hFq0pUByVJ Narendra Modi (@narendramodi) February 15, 2019

ALSO READ: India withdraws Most Favoured Nation status to Pakistan after Pulwama attack
