TN CM announces Rs 20 lakh solatium to families of 2 jawans killed in J&K attack

TN CM announces Rs 20 lakh solatium to families of 2 jawans killed in J&K attack

G Subramaniam from Kovilpatti and C Sivachandran from Ariyalur were among those killed in the terrorist attack that happened on Thursday.

news Pulwama attack

Tamil Nadu Chief Minister Edappadi K Palaniswami has announced a solatium of Rs 20 lakh each to the families of two Central Reserve Police Force (CRPF) jawans from the state who were killed in the Pulwama terror attack.

A statement released by the Chief Minister on Friday said, “I was pained to hear the death of many CRPF jawans in a terrorist attack in Pulwama district in Jammu and Kashmir. I severely condemn this attack on the soldiers. I express my deepest condolences and sympathies to the families of those who were killed.”

Of the 44 troopers who were killed in the attack, two of them – G Subramaniam from Kovilpatti and C Sivachandran from Ariyalur – were from Tamil Nadu. Expressing his sadness over the death of the two jawans, the chief minister announced that a solatium of Rs 20 lakh will be immediately provided to the families of both the troopers.

A total of 44 CRPF jawans were killed in a deadly terrorist attack on Thursday in Pulwama district in Jammu and Kashmir. The attack happened at around 3.15 pm on Thursday when a 'fidayeen' (suicide) attacker belonging to the Jaish-e-Muhammad (JeM) terror outfit rammed an explosives-laden SUV into the CRPF troopers’ bus in Lethpora area of Pulwama district on the Jammu-Srinagar highway. The attack also left several others injured who were rushed to the Army base hospital in Badamibagh cantonment, Srinagar.

The CRPF convoy consisted of 78 vehicles and 2,547 jawans moving from Jammu to Srinagar. According to an earlier report, the attack happened despite the Intelligence unit having issued a warning of such a possibility around two days ago. A video was uploaded by JeM with a threat message and visuals showing a troop-laden truck in Somalia being blown up using an Improvised Explosive Device (IED).

The Central government held a meeting of the Cabinet Committee of Security (CCS) on Friday morning in New Delhi following the attack, which was chaired by Prime Minister Narendra Modi.
