Pulwama terrorist attack: Rahul Gandhi supports PM Modi just second time in 5 years

NEW DELHI: When Congress president Rahul Gandhi on Friday expressed solidarity with the Modi government on the Pulwama terror attack on CRPF jawans, he presented a sharp contrast to his stand on other issues related to national security such as the surgical strike and the security forces in recent times.A day after the Pulwama terror attack, when 40 soldiers lost their lives, Gandhi said the entire opposition stood united with the security forces and the government.The Congress president expressed such solidarity with the BJP-led NDA government only for the second time in the last five years. It was during the surgical strike carried out by the Army in September 2016. However, he had taken a volte face within a week.On Friday, Gandhi provided unequivocal support not just of the Congress but of the entire opposition on the Pulwama terror attack. He said, “This is a terrible tragedy. This type of violence done against our security forces is absolutely disgusting. The aim of terrorism is to divide the country. No one can divide this country and the entire opposition stands united with the security forces and the government.”Gandhi also promised that there would be no other discussion by his party for the next couple of days. “This is a time of mourning and sadness. We are fully supporting the Government of India and the forces. There is going to be no other discussion by the Congress party over the next couple of days,” he said.Similarly, a day after the Army carried out cross-border operations on September 29, 2016, Gandhi had generously praised Prime Minister Narendra Modi . He was on the last leg of his Kisan Yatra ahead of the Uttar Pradesh assembly election.He acknowledged his unprecedented praise of Modi stating that the latter had done his first good work as PM.However, he took a sharp U-turn within a week with his "khoon ki dalali" remark. He alleged that Modi was earning profit from the blood of soldiers.Gandhi faced the brunt of people on the social media. Even Delhi Chief Minister Arvind Kejriwal condemned his remarks. However, later Kejriwal himself demanded proofs of the surgical strikes.In the Pulwama terror attack, though Gandhi has stood by the government, senior Congress leaders have missed no chance to attack the Centre.Congress party communications in charge Randeep Singh Surjewala termed the attack an utter failure of the Modi government. In a series of tweets, he said, “In the past 55 months, Pakistan committed more than 5000 ceasefire violations at the LoC and international border- a whopping 1000 per cent increase compared to the last 55 months of UPA. Where is the ‘56 inch chest’? Where is the ‘Laal Aankh’?“This horrific attack in J&K is a testimony to Modi government’s utter failure on national security.Zero political action and zero policy to tackle terror has led to an alarming security situation BJP ruled J&K for four years. BJP rules J&K via governor’s rule. The BJP plunged J&K into deep turmoil,” he said.In charge of BJP’s national information and technology wing Amit Malviya hit back at the Congress. He said the Congress was speaking in two languages. He also said Gandhi may have learnt a lesson from the surgical strike and was, therefore, cautious.Talking to TIMESOFINDIA.COM, Malviya said, “The double speak on acts of terror in the Congress party is loud enough for no one to miss. Rahul Gandhi seemingly speaks alongside the government but his deputy Randeep Surjewala leaves no time in politicising the issue. Gandhi’s publicly stated position on the current terror strike can be seen in the context of his questioning the successful surgical strike undertaken by Army in the aftermath of the Uri attack. The wide condemnation that he was subjected to has perhaps made him to be careful with his words this time.”Not just Surjewala but also other Congress leaders sought to politicise the Pulwama terror attack. Party spokesperson Abhishek Manu Singhvi said, “As a state and nation, we have failed today by a huge-huge margin. 350kgs of RDX and 40 soldiers martyred and the state has no clue!”He launched a frontal attack on the Modi government and said, “Sad and terrible but true. The five worst ever attacks & deaths in Jammu & Kashmir due to terrorism have been during BJP/NDA rule: 1/10/01 J&K assembly (38 died); 14/5/02 Kaluchak (34); 24/11/02 Raghunathtemple Jammu (14); 18/9/16 Uri (19) & now Pulwama (42).”Singhvi also broached the Kandahar IC-814 plane hijack incident to attack the BJP. He said, “Escorting Masood Azhar out of Indian prison to Afghanistan has cost India most dearly. If total deaths of innocents and brave jawans due to Masood machinations were added up since last 19-20 years post his release, they would cross 200-250 if not more!”While his party leaders may speak in a different voice, Gandhi has backed the Modi government. He had stood by the government even during the surgical strikes before taking a U-turn a week later. It remains to be seen whether he sticks to his word this time round.
