U.S. and Canada raise WTO counter notification on India’s MSP

The complaint says India “substantially underreported” its market price support for chickpeas, lentils, pigeon peas, black matpe and mung beans

The United States and Canada have submitted a counter-notification to the World Trade Organization’s Committee on Agriculture on India’s minimum support prices (MSP, also referred to as market price support) for certain agricultural commodities, US Trade Representative Robert Lighthizer and Agriculture Secretary Sonny Perdue announced on Friday. The complaint – which Canada has also joined – says India “substantially underreported” its market price support for chickpeas, lentils, pigeon peas, black matpe and mung beans.

“ When calculated according to WTO Agreement on Agriculture methodology, India’s market price support for each of these pulses far exceeded its WTO allowable levels of trade-distorting domestic support,” a statement on the USTR website said.

“ The United States expects a robust discussion on how India implements and notifies its policies at the next COA meeting, which is scheduled for February 26-27, 2019,” the statement said.

The U.S. and Canadian complaint has raised concerns about the market price support notification India submitted to the WTO. Specifically, according to the complaint, India left out from its notification information on the total value of production of each of the five kind of pulses and there were issues around the production quantities of the pulses used to calculate market price support as well as the exchange rate used .

This is the third U.S. counter-notification with regard to India. Last November the U.S. submitted a counter-notification on India’s market support price for cotton, and one on Indian rice and wheat earlier. Australia had submitted a counter notification on Indian sugarcane, the WTO announced last November.

India will have to fight the claims made by the US and Canada and if it is not successful, will have to discontinue its programs or pay a penalty. India has raised issues with the way MSP is calculated, including, as Business Line recently reported, by arguing that the rules allow for use of the U.S. dollar in calculations (rather than the Indian Rupee, which Canada and the U.S. argue should be used). India has also maintained that only “eligible production”- what is procured by government entities , rather than “total production” should be considered in calculating support prices.
