India’s PM promises retaliation after worst attack in Kashmir - International

India’s Prime Minister Narendra Modi vowed on Friday to punish those responsible for the deadliest attack in three decades in Indian-controlled Kashmir as pressure mounted on his government to take military action against militant groups in neighbouring Pakistan.



Modi described the “deep anger” in India a day after a suicide bomber rammed an explosive-laden vehicle into a convoy of security personnel, killing 40 paramilitary officers as they travelled toward the city of Srinagar.



“Your blood boils at what happened,” Modi said. He promised that those behind the attack would “pay a very heavy price for their actions.”



India made clear that it holds Pakistan responsible for the unprecedented attack. India and the United States accuse Pakistan of supporting and sheltering militants who launch attacks into Indian-held territory, something which Pakistan denies.



A Pakistan-based militant group called Jaish-e-Mohammed, or Army of Mohammed, claimed responsibility for

Thursday’s attack.



The group was banned by Pakistan but its leader, a radical cleric -Masood Azhar- is reportedly based in the Pakistani city of Bahawalpur. Officials in Pakistan deny that they support or protect militant leaders like Azhar.



The Indian government said Friday it will launch an effort to diplomatically isolate Pakistan, but ultimately India will be obliged to respond to the attack with military means, said Shivshankar Menon, India’s former National Security Adviser.



By Joanna Slater, Niha Masih (c) 2019, The Washington Post · Feb 15, 2019 - NEW DELHI -

Pakistan summons Indian envoy over Kashmir incident - FO official

ISLAMABAD REUTERS Feb 15 - Pakistan summoned India’s deputy head of mission to Islamabad on Friday after Prime Minister Narendra Modi accused Pakistan of involvement in a suicide attack that killed 44 policemen in Kashmir, a foreign office official said. “We strongly rejected (India’s) baseless allegations,” the official said in a text message, adding that the deputy head of mission had been summoned because the High Commissioner had left Islamabad.
