IN PHOTOS: PM Modi Pays Tribute To 'brave Sons Of Mother India' At Wreath-laying Ceremony

"India's blood is boiling," said Prime Minister Narendra Modi expressing the country's sentiment after the cowardly Pulwama terror attack on a convoy that martyred 40 jawaans and injured many others.

Paying his last tributes to the 'brave sons of Mother India,' PM Modi shared pictures from the wreath-laying ceremony and penned down a note in remembrance of the martyred.

Through his Instagram, along with a series of photographs, he wrote:

We salute you, brave sons of Mother India.

You lived for the nation and served the country with unparalleled valour.

We stand in solidarity with the families of those martyred in Pulwama.

Prime Minister Modi place the wreath of flowers as a mark of respect before the mortals remains of the soldiers. Folding his hand, Prime Minister observed two minutes of silence for the brave soldiers. He then walked past the chests of the 40 brave men who lost their lives in the service of the nation.

Along with the Prime Minister, Union Home Minister Rajnath Singh, Union Defence Minister Nirmala Sitharaman, Delhi Chief Minister Arvind Kejriwal, MoS Rajyvardhan Singh Rathore and Congress President Rahul Gandhi also paid their last tribute to Pulwama martyrs.

READ| Government Calls For All-party Meet To Brief Opposition Parties In The Aftermath Of Pulwama Terror Attack: LIVE UPDATES

The mortal remains of the CRPF soldiers were airlifted to their families.

Addressing a massive rally in Jhansi, Uttar Pradesh, PM Modi tore into the neighbors and warned them that by their recent set of actions, they have only brought wrath upon themselves.

"The perpetrators of Pulwama attack, the masterminds of the attack, they will get the punishment they deserve. Our neighboring country is forgetting that this is the 'New India'. For the shameless act by the terror outfits and their masters, we will give it back to them," he said.

Pertaining to the gruesome attack, even the world has shown solidarity to India, denouncing the terror attack. Furthermore, representatives from Germany, Hungary, Italy, European Union, Canada, Britain, Russia, Israel, Australia, Japan, South Korea, Sweden, Slovakia, France, Spain and Bhutan arrived in India ahead of meeting at Ministry of External Affairs.
