Amitabh Bachchan to donate Rs 2.5 crore to families of soldiers martyred in Pulwama attack

Amitabh Bachchan will donate Rs 5 lakh each to the families of the Central Reserve Police Force (CRPF) jawans who were martyred in the Pulwama terror attack. The actor will be donating a total amount of Rs 2.5 crore, he revealed in a tweet.

On Thursday afternoon, Adil Ahmad Dar of the Pakistan-sponsored terrorist outfit Jaish-e-Mohammad rammed a SUV filled with explosives into a bus that was part of a security convoy. The attack, which is the deadliest on security forces in decades and the worst ever terror attack in Jammu and Kashmir, has claimed the lives of 40 soldiers.

ALSO READ | We want surgical strike in Pakistan to avenge Pulwama attack, says family of martyred CRPF jawan

Currently, Amitabh is in the process of finding out "from several government sources where and how the amount will be distributed to ensure it is expedited", reports IANS. "Yes, Mr Bachchan will be giving Rs 5 lakh to each of the martyrs' families and is currently finding out the correct process to do so," his spokesperson confirmed to the agency.

ALSO READ | Pulwama terror attack: Akshay Kumar to Priyanka Chopra, Bollywood says hate is NEVER the answer

Meanwhile, Prime Minister Narendra Modi warned the perpetrators of the attack that they will receive a befitting reply. "Bharat ki ye niti rahi hai ki hum kisi ko chhedte nahin hai, lekin main fir saaf kar doon ki naye Bharat ko kisi ne chheda to wo chhodta bhi nahi hai. Ye humare surakshabalon ne pehle bhi kar dikhaya hai aur ab bhi koi kasar chhodi nahi jaayegi (It has been India's policy that we don't initiate conflict. However, I want to make it clear that if anyone messes with the new India, we do not let them go free. Our security forces have proved this in the past and this time, too, no stone will be left unturned)," he said at an event in Dhule, Maharashtra.

TRACK THE AFTERMATH OF THE PULWAMA TERROR ATTACK HERE

ALSO READ | Sara Ali Khan and Janhvi Kapoor on Pulwama terror attack: Absolutely heartbreaking

ALSO READ | Kangana Ranaut on Pulwama terror attack: Anyone who talks peace now should be slapped on the streets

ALSO READ | Sonu Nigam attacks secular Indians after Pulwama tragedy: Kyun dukh mana rahe ho?
