Pulwama attack: Home Ministry issues advisory to states, UTs to ensure safety of J&K students, residents

File Image of Home Minister Rajnath Singh | Photo Credit: PTI

New Delhi: In the wake of a terror attack on CRPF convoy in south Kashmir’s Pulwama district, the Ministry of Home Affairs (MHA), on Saturday, issued an advisory to all states and Union Territories to take necessary measures to ensure the safety of students and residents of Jammu and Kashmir.

According to MHA officials, there have been some reports of students and other residents of Jammu and Kashmir experiencing threats and intimidation in light of Pulwama attack, PTI reported.

The advisory comes hours after Home Minister Rajnath Singh held an all-party meeting to review the security situation in Jammu and Kashmir and to chalk out the future course of action to tackle terrorism. During the meeting, the home minister assured protection to the Kashmiri students and people who were allegedly threatened after the terrorist attack. Rajnath also directed the officials to take all possible steps to hunt down terrorists currently operating in Kashmir valley.

Some Kashmiri students were allegedly harassed and asked to vacate accommodations by their landlords in Uttarakhand’s Dehradun fearing attacks on their properties in the wake of the Pulwama attack, according to news agency PTI.

On Thursday, at least 40 security personnel lost their lives and several others were injured after a Jaish-e-Mohammad (JeM) terrorist rammed an explosive-laden car into a CRPF convoy in Awantipora of south Kashmir’s Pulwama district.

The attack has drawn criticism from various quarters, with many people holding several protests and candlelight marches across the country.

Earlier today, Prime Minister Narendra Modi sent a stern message to Pakistan, saying that if someone teases new India, it will not let it go unpunished. He further asserted that security forces have been given a free hand to punish the perpetrators of the attack.
