At all-party meet, Farooq Abdullah demands security for J&K students outside state

NEW DELHI: The political class came together on Saturday to unanimously condemn Thursday's attack, blaming Pakistan without naming it for the outrage and expressing solidarity with security forces in the fight against terrorism."The entire nation speaks in one voice to express its determination to fight these challenges. Today, we stand united in solidarity with our security forces in fighting terrorism and in defending the unity and integrity of India," read the resolution adopted by an all-party meeting convened by home minister Rajnath Singh.Congress and other opposition parties demanded PM Narendra Modi call a meeting with leaders of all parties to discuss terrorism.The demand suggested that the opposition finds as “inadequate” a meeting of floor leaders chaired by Singh and wants the engagement to be scaled up. It is understood that some participants like Trinamool Congress felt unhappy that the draft of the resolution had been prepared beforehand.As they unanimously slammed the terror attack, BJP allies Akali Dal and Shiv Sena brought up references that could discomfit the government. Akali MP Prem Singh Chandumajra said the government should ensure that “a community” is not targeted like Sikhs were in 1984. He underlined the need to identify the specific perpetrators of the attack. Sena MP Sanjay Raut held up Indira Gandhi as an exemplar of decisive action.National Conference patriarch Farooq Abdullah asked the government to provide security to J&K students outside the state. He added steps be taken to ensure there is no communal flare-up in the state. At this point, home minister Singh said advisories have been issued to states to ensure peace and deal firmly with miscreants.The demand for a meeting with the PM was raised by Congress representatives Ghulam Nabi Azad, Anand Sharma, Jyotiraditya Scindia and K C Venugopal, and found support from other parties, including Trinamool Congress’s Derek O’Brien and CPI’s D Raja. The resolution blamed “forces across the border” for the terror attack, in what was a clear allusion to Pakistan. “We condemn terrorism and the support being given to it from across the border,” it said.Shiv Sena’s Sanjay Raut brought up Indira Gandhi as the inspiration in delivering a response to Pakistan, in what was a reference to 1971. He urged that the country move strategically in its response. Later, he said that Pulwama would not have happened if surgical strikes carried out post-Uri had an impact on Pakistan.
