Pulwama terror attack: Ayushmann Khurrana salutes courage of soldiers in heartfelt poem

The nation was left in mourning when a convoy of Central Reserve Police Force (CRPF) vehicles was targetted by Jaish-e-Mohammed (JeM) suicide bomber Adil Ahmad Dar on Thursday afternoon. He rammed his explosive-laden car into a bus in the security convoy, claiming the lives of 40 jawans and leaving several more injured.

The attack, which is the deadliest on security forces in decades, has been strongly condemned by people across the country, from politicians to Bollywood celebrities.

ALSO READ | Pulwama terror attack: Akshay Kumar to Priyanka Chopra, Bollywood says hate is NEVER the answer

Ayushmann Khurrana was heartbroken by the Pulwama tragedy and penned a heartfelt poem saluting the courage and sacrifice of soldiers and their families. He shared the poem on his Twitter account.

Currently, the Indian government launched a diplomatic offensive against Pakistan and is taking steps towards ensuring its complete isolation in the international community.

Prime Minister Narendra Modi warned the perpetrators of the attack that they will receive a befitting reply. "Bharat ki ye niti rahi hai ki hum kisi ko chhedte nahin hai, lekin main fir saaf kar doon ki naye Bharat ko kisi ne chheda to wo chhodta bhi nahi hai. Ye humare surakshabalon ne pehle bhi kar dikhaya hai aur ab bhi koi kasar chhodi nahi jaayegi," he said at an event in Dhule, Maharashtra, on Saturday.

THe prime minister also revealed that the security forces have been given a "free hand" to retaliate to the dastardly attack. "I pay tribute to soldiers who lost their lives in the Pulwama attack. Our security forces have been given full freedom. We have full faith in their bravery," he said at an event on Friday morning.

ALSO READ | We want surgical strike in Pakistan to avenge Pulwama attack, says family of martyred CRPF jawan

ALSO READ | Sara Ali Khan and Janhvi Kapoor on Pulwama terror attack: Absolutely heartbreaking

ALSO READ | Kangana Ranaut on Pulwama terror attack: Anyone who talks peace now should be slapped on the streets

ALSO READ | Sonu Nigam attacks secular Indians after Pulwama tragedy: Kyun dukh mana rahe ho?
