Government Scraps Security For 6 Separatists After Pulwama Attack

Mirwaiz Umar Farooq is among six separatists to lose their security cover

Highlights Security scrapped for Mirwaiz Umar Farooq, Abdul Ghani Bhat, others

Rajnath Singh had said security for those funded by Pak will be reviewed

Hurriyat said its leaders had never asked for security

The government will no longer provide any security to separatists in Jammu and Kashmir, sources in the home ministry said. The order from the state administration, issued three days after the deadly terror attack on a CRPF convoy in Pulwama that cost over 40 lives, said all security and vehicles provided to the separatists will be withdrawn by this evening.

Yesterday, Union home minister Rajnath Singh said security cover provided to people who get funds from Pakistan and its intelligence agency ISI will be reviewed soon.

The list issued today includes Hurriyat's Mirwaiz Umar Farooq, Fazal Haq Qureshi and Abdul Ghani Bhat, Bilal Lone of People's Conference, Hashim Qureshi of Jammu Kashmir Liberation Front and Shabir Shah of Jammu and Kashmir Democratic Freedom Party.

"No security forces or cover should be provided, under any pretext, to them or any other separatist. If they have any other facilities provided by the government, they are to be withdrawn immediately," an official said.

The government was roughly spending around Rs 28 lakh on the security of these leaders.

As a Z-category protectee, Mirwaiz Umer Farooq needed around 70 security men around him round-the-clock. The cost came to around Rs 20 lakh a month. The rest, as Y category protectees, had 5 to 7 security guards. The cost for each came up to around 2 lakh.

Over 40 CRPF soldiers died in the Pulwama terror attack

The Hurriyat said its leaders had never asked for security and it was the government which insisted on it. "It was the government's decision at the time to keep it (security), today it is their decision to remove it. It's not an issue for us," a spokesperson of the separatist organisation said.

The list is likely to be updated - the order said the state police will review if any other separatists are also who have government security or facilities and will withdraw these immediately, officials told NDTV.

The government had promised action after Thursday's suicide attack, during which a terrorist drove an explosive-laden car at the convoy. Jaish-e-Mohammad had taken responsibility for the attack.

New Delhi India is building diplomatic and trade pressure on Pakistan, which is facing grave financial troubles.

The government has withdrawn the 'Most Favoured Nation' (MFN) status granted to Pakistan, and hiked the basic customs duty on all goods imported from there to 200%.

Over 40 nations have condemned the terror attack and New Delhi has asked the international community to support naming Jaish chief Masood Azhar as a "UN designated terrorist".
