Goa: Banner goes viral for warning tourists not to use Google Maps while visiting Baga Beach

@tweesumz · | Photo Credit: Twitter

Goa: Google Maps is one of the most reliable applications in the world. It not only keeps a track of your location and destination but also shows distances between two points, the estimated time of arrival and also the traffic conditions prevailing on various roads of a city or town. However, there are times when the most reliable Google application makes mistakes in charting correct routs, thereby prolonging the travel time.

One such place in India, where Google Maps are known to make mistakes, is North Goa. The route to Baga Beach from nearby hotels can often be a tricky one and tourists often depend heavily on digital maps for directions.

There is one popular but wrong route that takes Baga Beach-bound tourists to a completely different location. But now a Good Samaritan is ensuring tourists don’t get lost while trying to reach their destination.

A banner, warning tourists about a wrong route to Baga Beach, has gone viral on social media.

“You are fooled by Google Maps. This road doesn’t take you to Baga Beach!!! Turn back and take a left turn, Baga is 1 km from here,” read the banner that is hung above a market area just 1 kilometers from Baga Beach.



Hahaha. @googlemaps what's the route to Baga beach?

Photo credits: masud. pic.twitter.com/0K2wK2TQD2 — Sumanth Raj Urs (@tweesumz) February 16, 2019

The banner not only warns tourists about the wrong route but also guides them back to the correct route.

A picture of the banner was first shared on Twitter by user Sumanth Raj Urs. It has now received more than 700 reactions with 213 retweets.

After the picture went viral, many users thanked Sumanth and the helpful people who put up the banner. Some even shared personal experiences of taking the wrong route for Baga from the same location.

Wow so sweet of whichever good samaritan did this lol. I've never thought beyond raising an error report — Atulaa (@atulaak) February 16, 2019





Nostalgia big time. — Passionately_yogi (@akanchharay) February 16, 2019

One user wrote, “Happened with me as well when I was in Goa... Google will mislead u while coming from Delhi to chandigarh as well which is pretty much straight.”
