KTR pays tribute to jawans killed in Pulwama terror attack at CRPF Southern HQ in Hyd

KTR pays tribute to jawans killed in Pulwama terror attack at CRPF Southern HQ in Hyd

KTR also handed over two cheques of Rs 25 lakh each from him and his friends to G H P Raju, Inspector General of Police, CRPF, Southern sector.

news Pulwama attack

Telangana Rashtra Samithi (TRS) working president KT Rama Rao paid tributes to the Pulwama martyrs at the CRPF Headquarters in Hyderabad on Sunday.

The terror attack on Thursday claimed the lives of 49 Central Reserve Police Force (CRPF) troopers. "I extend my heartfelt condolences. Indians will never forget the sacrifice of the martyrs. They will continue to remain in our hearts and prayers.

“I hope for the speedy recovery of all the CRPF jawans who were injured in the incident,” he added. "We live in a large democracy which feels safe today, primarily because of the men in uniform," said KTR, who is the son of Telangana Chief Minister K Chandrasekhar Rao.

He also prayed for the speedy recovery of the injured troopers. KTR also handed over two cheques of Rs 25 lakh each from him and his friends to G H P Raju, Inspector General of Police, CRPF, Southern sector.

A total of 44 CRPF jawans were killed in a deadly terrorist attack on Thursday in Pulwama district in Jammu and Kashmir. The attack happened at around 3.15 pm on February 14 when a 'fidayeen' (suicide) attacker belonging to the Jaish-e-Muhammad (JeM) terror outfit rammed an explosives-laden SUV into the CRPF troopers’ bus in Lethpora area of Pulwama district on the Jammu-Srinagar highway. The attack also left several others injured, who were rushed to the Army base hospital in Badamibagh cantonment, Srinagar.

The CRPF convoy consisted of 78 vehicles and 2,547 jawans moving from Jammu to Srinagar. According to an earlier report, the attack happened despite the Intelligence unit having issued a warning of such a possibility around two days ago. A video was uploaded by JeM with a threat message and visuals showing a troop-laden truck in Somalia being blown up using an Improvised Explosive Device (IED).

With IANS inputs




