CRPF warns against circulating fake pictures of body parts of martyrs

Visual from Awantipora, Pulwama where the terror attack took place on Thursday | Photo Credit: ANI

New Delhi: The Central Reserve Police Force (CRPF), on Sunday, issued an advisory asking people to not circulate fake pictures of body parts of martyrs as it would invoke hatred.

Taking note of the “fake pictures” of its soldier being shared on social media, the paramilitary force cautioned the people, saying, “It has been noticed that on social media some miscreants are trying to circulate fake pictures of body parts of our martyrs to invoke hatred while we stand united.”

"Please DO NOT circulate/share/like such photographs or posts," CRPF tweeted, asking people to report any such content at webpro@crpf.gov.in.

ADVISORY: It has been noticed that on social media some miscreants are trying to circulate fake pictures of body parts of our Martyrs to invoke hatred while we stand united. Please DO NOT circulate/share/like such photographs or posts. Report such content at webpro@crpf.gov.in — CRPF (@crpfindia) February 17, 2019

The advisory was reportedly issued after it was brought to the notice of force officials that several morphed photos of badly mutilated bodies were being circulated.

CRPF also issued another advisory on fake messages being circulated on social media about harassment of students from Kashmir.

“Fake news about harassment of students from #Kashmir is being propagated by various miscreants on social media. CRPF helpline has enquired about complaints about harassment and found them incorrect. These are attempts to invoke hatred. Please DO NOT circulate such posts. CRPF helpline has enquired about complaints about harassment and found them incorrect. These are attempts to invoke hatred. Please DO NOT circulate such posts,” it tweeted.

Pakistani-based terror group Jaish-e-Mohammed carried out a brutal attack in Jammu and Kashmir’s Pulwama district on February 14 claiming lives of 40 CRPF personnel. The attack is being considered as the deadliest terrorist strike on security forces in Kashmir Valley in three decades.
