Pulwama terror attack: Indian community in UAE pays tribute

Pulwama terror attack: Indian community in UAE pays tribute

Photo: Abhishek Sengupta/Khaleej Times

Abu Dhabi/Dubai - 49 CRPF personnel died after a suicide bomber had rammed an explosive-ridden vehicle into their convoy last week.

By Anjana Sankar and Abhishek Sengupta Published: Mon 18 Feb 2019, 2:31 PM Last updated: Mon 18 Feb 2019, 9:31 PM

Hundreds of Indians took part in candle light vigils and condolence meetings at the Indian Embassy in Abu Dhabi and the consulate in Dubai on Sunday evening to pay homage to 49 soldiers who were martyred in a terror attack in Indian-administered Kashmir.



With India still reeling in shock and grief from the terror act in Pulwama that claimed the lives of Central Reserve Police Force (CRPF) jawans on February 14, the expat community came together to express solidarity with their nation. A minute's silence was observed in respect for the fallen soldiers.



In one of the worst terror attacks that was claimed by Jaish-e-Mohammed (JeM), a suicide bomber rammed an explosive-ridden SUV into a moving CRPF convoy comprising 70 vehicles.



Indian Ambassador to the UAE Navdeep Singh Suri said one "cannot but help stand with the relatives and families of those soldiers who gave up their lives for the country".



Speaking at the condolence meeting, Suri also sounded out a staunch warning: "We as Indians will neither forgive or forget what has happened. The Prime Minister of India has promised retribution. Neither the terrorists groups nor their the masters will be forgiven. They will pay a heavy price."



But the envoy said India will chose its own time, place and manner to strike. "We will set the agenda."



He said the gravity of outrage was such that more than 50 countries have condemned the attack and offered support to India, and "the UAE was among the first to express solidarity with India on February 14 itself".



Suri also warned the community to be careful about "motivated rumours that are being circulated on WhatsApp and other social media platforms with the objective of setting off one Indian against another".



"CRPF itself has had to issue a warning today against falling for such rumours since they only serve the malign agenda of terrorist groups like Jaish-e-Mohammed and their masters."



Calling on all Indians to stand united, the envoy said "the presence this evening of so many people from all religions -- Hindus, Christians and Muslims -- is testimony to the fact that we may have our arguments but those are within the house. But when it comes to a foreign adversary, that adversary should fear that we stand united."



In Dubai, many Indians left work early to be part of the meeting at the consulate. Shamim, who hails from Kannur, Kerala, was among the first batch of people to arrive at the consulate at 7pm. "I came here because I wanted to express my grief for the fallen soldiers," said the sales executive in a Bur Dubai trading company.



Rohit Balan from Mumbai said he felt indebted to the soldiers who "laid their lives to ensure the safety of his countrymen". "I got a WhatsApp forward and left earlier from work to be here," said the marketing manager of a Dubai firm.



Vipul, Consul General of India in Dubai, told Khaleej Times: "This was an opportunity for Indians to share their grief and anguish and stand in solidarity with the families of those martyred soldiers."



Photo: Abhishek Sengupta/Khaleej Times

Photo: Abhishek Sengupta/Khaleej Times

Indian ambassador to UAE Navdeep Singh Suri during a condolence meet in Abu Dhabi. Photo: Ryan Lim/Khaleej Times

Photo: Ryan Lim/Khaleej Times
