What changed your markets while you were sleeping

Others Source: sgxnifty.org

Stock Analysis – Know before investing Stock score of Yes Bank Ltd moved up by 4 in 3 months on a 10-point scale. Subscribe Now Exclusively for

Stock Analysis Stock score of Yes Bank Ltd is 6 on a scale of 10. View Stock Analysis »

YES Bank

NEW DELHI: Benchmark equity indices may kick off the week on a firm note on Monday amid optimism over US-China trade talks. But a rise in crude oil prices may play spoiler.Let's check out what all may move market all through Monday:Nifty futures on the Singapore Exchange were trading 16 points, or 0.15 per cent, higher at 10,770.50, indicating a positive start for the Nifty50.Nifty50 on Friday formed a small bearish candle on the daily chart that resembled a ‘bullish hammer’. On the weekly chart, it formed a Bearish Belt Hold pattern. While the technical setup has a negative bias, bouts of buying could emerge from the lows.The bulls managed to defend the crucial 10,700 support that was tested Friday. The range for the markets, based on front month options’ open interest, is at 10,700-11,000 with chances of a re-test of the support having increased amid simmering tensions with neighbouring Pakistan, which is believed to be behind the Pulwama terror attack on Thursday. Derivatives analysts expect the market to largely respect the range for the current expiry but are not ruling out a re-test of the 10,700 mark.Asian share markets firmed on Monday as investors dared to hope for both progress at Sino-US trade talks in Washington this week and more policy stimulus from major central banks. MSCI ’s broadest index of Asia-Pacific shares outside Japan added 0.3 per cent, partially recovering from a sharp fall last Friday. Japan’s Nikkei climbed 1.6 per cent to hit its highest for the year so far, while Australia’s main index rose 0.7 per cent.Overseas orders for Japanese machinery posted their biggest decline in more than a decade in December and manufacturers expect orders to fall further this quarter as trade friction weigh on global demand.Data released on Monday showed core machinery orders, considered a leading indicator of capital expenditure, fell 0.1 percent month-on-month in December. This was the first decline in three months but was smaller than the median estimate for a 1.1 percent decrease.Oil prices rose to their highest levels since November last year on Monday, lifted by OPEC-led supply cuts and US sanctions on Iran and Venezuela. US West Texas Intermediate (WTI) crude oil futures pushed through $56 per barrel for the first time this year, hitting $56.13 a barrel before edging back to $56.02 a barrel, still up 0.8 per cent from their last settlement.India Inc was able to clock a double-digit revenue growth for the fifth consecutive quarter in the three months to December 2018, but this was at the expense of profits and profitability. The pressure on margins and on the bottom-line is expected to remain in the next two quarters amid slack demand and volatile input prices.The Reserve Bank of India has warned Yes Bank of regulatory action for disclosure of nil divergence report in violation of the confidentiality clause, the private sector lender said Friday. Yes Bank in a press release earlier this week had said the RBI has not found any divergence in the asset classification and provisioning done by the lender during 2017-18.The Anil Ambani-led Reliance Group has reached an understanding with more than 90% of its lenders to avoid selling any stock pledged by the promoters until September 30 on account of lower collateral cover or reduced margin due to the recent unprecedented fall in share prices.Baring, Bain and Hero Fincorp are in talks to buy a 10% stake in Dewan Housing Finance Corp Ltd (DHFL), said people with knowledge of the matter. Chairman Kapil Wadhawan plans to step down from active management after the sale, they said.L&T has changed its practice of disclosing details of order wins as it doesn’t want competitors to know its pricing strategy, a development that is a statement on the intense competition in the sector.After 27 years of tortuous battle, involving claims, counterclaims, and cross-appeals, the Income tax tribunal has scrapped almost the entire tax demand on late Harshad Mehta , his wife Jyoti, and brother Ashwin — reviving memories of the 1992 securities scam that shook the country and changed the rules of game on Dalal Street The government's disinvestment proceeds have touched Rs 53,558 crore so far in the current fiscal, as against the full year budget target of Rs 80,000 crore. Last week, as much as RS 10,000 crore came in from Bharat-22 ETF and, another Rs 5,379 crore from the sale of Specified Undertaking of Unit Trust of India (SUUTI) stake in Axis Bank Foreign portfolio investors (FPIs) sold Rs 966 crore worth of domestic stocks on Friday, data available with NSE suggested. DIIs were net buyers to the tune of Rs 583 crore, data suggested.
