The buzz around portable urination aids for women

It started as a digital whisper among the rising network of women backpackers, and spread to girls and women who commute even within a city. The stand-and-pee aid was popular in Europe, made its way to India six years ago, and is now pushing a whole new segment of urination aids. Ironically enough, through products all made by men.

Few expect the accessibility (or the lack thereof) of public toilets to change overnight. Tired of either holding it in during long journeys, or practising yogic postures to ‘hover’ over an unclean toilet, women have been turning to portable urination aids.

The latest to join this budding market is startup Sanfe, founded by IIT-Delhi students Archit Aggarwal and Harry Sehrawat, who are working with doctors at AIIMS, Delhi. Its campaign #StandUpForYourself, has been giving out one lakh free products to anyone who shares their post and user experience. The idea, right now, is to increase the buzz around urination aids.

The heavy lifting of the awareness drive was done by PeeBuddy, who’ve been doing this since 2013. “The idea for PeeBuddy came about when my wife and I were taking a road trip, along with another couple, from Jaipur to Delhi,” says Deep, founder of Sirona, the mother brand for PeeBuddy. “My wife was pregnant then, in the last trimester. During the road trip, us men would be drinking whatever we wanted and the women were careful not to drink too much water.” This, coupled with the fact that his mother had arthritis led him and his wife to brainstorm over these aids.

Building a brand

In 2013, PeeSafe first entered this market with their toilet sanitiser sprays that work against e coli bacteria, and prevent infections. “My wife had a urinary tract infection on our road trip in Ahmedabad then. We had to fly back to Delhi because she had high fever,” recalls founder Vikas Bagaria. “We had stayed in the best hotels, and had access to seemingly clean toilets.” However, he points out that germs still spread.

How it works Most urination aids are funnel-shaped. The top arc of the wider end covers the urethra, and the bottom arc is snuggled next to the outer labia. The tunnel streamlines the urine flowing outward, and away from the body; some have a plastic waterproof coating to reduce splashes.

PeeSafe diversified, and soon became a leading female hygiene brand, as did PeeBuddy, turning into Sirona: both now sell menstruation-related products. Urination aids and toilet sprays perhaps alone won’t foot the bill: the market still revolves around menstruation. Sirona, for instance, claims its highest-selling product is menstruation cups, followed by menstruation-cramp-relief products. Not even a year old, Sanfe is also exploring period-pain-relief products.

Broaching the subject of urination aids has not been easy, says Deep: “Though there is hesitation to talk about it, there isn’t hesitation to buy. Those who buy once, definitely buy it again.”

Sanfe that entered the market way after PeeBuddy is banking on its single-hand-use, biodegradable, and period-friendly tags to set itself apart. “Our product is suitable for different attire, because its design is such that you need only one hand to hold and pee, the other can take care of your sari, or suit. We have also made the edges softer so that it is easier for menstruating women to use it,” says Archit.

But the biggest factor for their growth has been political espousal for causes like Swachh Bharat, which, in its call for more toilets, has also pointed towards the poor maintenance of the existing ones. Says Vikas, “We collaborated on the promotion of the movie, Toilet, Ek Prem Katha. In the four years before that movie, we sold one lakh units, but from 2017 to 2018, we sold more than 7.5 lakh.”

The F word

Like sanitation pads, tampons and cups, urination aids too, have been aligning themselves with women empowerment. “There are our products, and then there are our services: through our blogs, we disburse the right information about the larger problem,” he says.

Interestingly however, in one of PeeBuddy’s award-winning advertising videos, the actor stresses that the product wasn’t about feminism, but about hygiene and accessibility. It seems even path-breaking feminine-hygiene entrepreneurs shy away from the f word.

Archit adds that the goal for Sanfe is to make life easier for all women, including those who are differently-abled, older women with arthritis, women who have chronic knee or back pain, or those with injuries.

What lies ahead

Assuming there comes a day when the market overflows (!) with urination aids, what would make a particular brand stand (there we go again) apart? On the one hand, there are technological innovations; Deep reveals his future plans for PeeBuddy: “We are working on pregnancy testing for women. In Indian home kits right now, you have to pee in a container and then use a dropper on the stick. So now we plan to integrate PeeBuddy with pregnancy tests to make the process easier,” he says.

Sanfe’s Archit says his team is working on making his products completely flushable, so that the problem of disposal is solved. But more than concentrating on research, Archit wants to explore the markets already available.

“We are looking at making urination devices available at pathology labs, for urine-collection samples. With these, women can give samples easily without splashes or spillages,” he says.

So even as we wait for clean, inclusive toilets, we might as well fall back on some regular old jugaad.
