Hathway giving unlimited data at Rs 349 lifetime broadband plan: Everything you need to know

While there is still some time left for the commercial launch of Jio GigaFiber, its effect on the broadband segment can already be seen. The rival companies are revamping its plans to beat Jio as and when it arrives in the broadband market. Hathway which is one of the leading broadband service providers in India and could be one of the top rivals of Jio has announced a new Life Set Hai offer under which it is giving unlimited data at 50Mbps speeds to its subscribers.

According to a Telecom Talk report, the company has announced a new Rs 349 offer under the scheme that gives unlimited data with no FUP limit on the data at 50Mbps broadband speeds to its users. Reportedly, the plan is available only in Hyderabad city for now.

Besides the newly launched Rs 349 plan, Hathway has five other plans in Hyderabad with no FUP limits on them. There is a 25Mbps plan that comes with a monthly rental of Rs 349 with no FUP limits for a month. The half-yearly of the plan is Rs 2,394 while the yearly subscription costs Rs 4,500.

Beside the BSNL and Airtel, Jio's GigaFiber service will see a tough fight from companies like ACT Fibernet and Hathways too. ACT Fibernet which enjoys a strong foot in South India has also announced its plans to expand its services across the country. ACT Fibernet has recently partnered with Amazon to offer free Amazon Fire TV stick with its select broadband plans. Also the offer is available only in select cities. ACT has also launched a new Rs 349 plan that offers unlimited data at 50Mbps speed with no FUP for a month.

BSNL has also upped its broadband game before the arrival of Jio by launching Bharat Fiber- its high speed broadband service. The service will offer high speed broadband services to the subscribers. BSNL is taking the online bookings for the Bharat Fiber via its official web portal. The service is said to offer 35GB data per day at price as low as Rs 1.1 per GB.

Jio is expected to go for the commercial launch of its GigaFiber broadband service this year. The service already live in select cities as a free offer. Until now the launch was expected to happen in March but now it could be delayed considering the poor speed of deployment of the service.




