Pulwama terror attack proves time for talks is over:PM Modi

New Delhi: Prime Minister Narendra Modi on Monday asserted that brutal terror attack in Pulwama in Jammu and Kashmir proves that time for talks is over.

Speaking at a joint media briefing after delegation level talks with visiting Argentinian President Mauricio Macri, Mr Modi said that both he and President Macri agree that terrorism is a huge threat for global peace and stability.

The Prime Minister said that the entire world needs to united against terrorism and its supporters and take strong actions.

In a joint special declaration to fight terrorism, India and Argentina stressed upon the need for concerted action by the global community against terrorism. Both the countries stressed that there could be no justification for acts of terror on any grounds whatsoever particularly emphasizing the scourge of cross border terrorism.

The five-point special declaration said that both leaders emphasized that terrorism must be confronted unequivocally and resolutely. They reiterated their commitment to combat terrorism in all its forms and manifestations, and asserted that strong measures should be taken against terrorists, terror organizations, their networks and all those who encourage, support, finance and provide safe haven to terrorists and terror groups. They also underscored the need to ensure that terrorist organizations do not get access to any WMD or technologies or finances and committed to cooperate in the specialized multilateral fora.

Argentina condemned in the strongest terms the brutal terrorist attack that took place in Pulwama district of Jammu and Kashmir on February 14 against convoy of the Central Reserve Police Force (CRPF), in which more than 40 CRPF personnel lost their lives and a large number were injured and expressed its solidarity with the families of the sons of India that lost their lives on this brutal terrorist attack.

The leaders stressed that terrorism is a global scourge that must be fought and terrorist safe havens rooted out in every part of the world. They resolved that India and Argentina will fight together against this grave challenge to humanity. They committed to strengthen cooperation against terrorist threats from groups listed in relevant United Nations Security Council Resolutions.

They gave a call that no country must allow their territory to be used to launch terrorist attacks on other countries.

Both President Macri and Prime Minister Modi also affirmed their support for a U.N. Comprehensive Convention on International Terrorism that will advance and strengthen the framework for global cooperation and reinforce the message that no cause or grievance justifies terrorism.

Conveying condolences to the victims of the “cruel attack”, President Macri said such acts were against the spirit of ‘co-existence’ of mankind.

Prime Minister Modi said: “I and President Macri agree that the challenge offered by terrorism to global peace is very serious”. He said that time has come for tackling terror menace unitedly and by taking “concrete steps.’’ He said India and Argentina complement each other and “we will work together to help both countries”.
