BJP, Shiv Sena seal alliance for 2019 Lok Sabha elections; to contest on 25, 23 seats respectively

BJP president Amit Shah, Shiv Sena supremo Uddhav Thackeray and Maharashtra CM Devendra Fadnavis at the press conference | Image courtesy: Twitter @ Aaditya Thackeray

Mumbai: In a big development ahead of the 2019 Lok Sabha Elections, the Bharatiya Janata Party and the Shiv Sena on Monday announced their alliance for the upcoming General Elections and the Maharashtra Legislative Assembly Elections. The announcement was made at a press conference attended by BJP president Amit Shah, Shiv Sena supremo Uddhav Thackeray and state Chief Minister Devendra Fadnavis.

Fadnavis said while the Shiv Sena will contest on 23 seats out of the total 48 Lok Sabha seats in the state, the BJP will fight on 25 seats. Shortly before the press conference, Amit Shah arrived at Uddhav Thackeray's residence here, Matoshree.

“We have taken this decision in the interest of the nation and we believe the NDA will come to power in 2019. For Maharashtra Assembly Elections, we will hold discussions with our other allies. Leaving the numbers of seats taken by our allies, BJP and Shiv Sena will fight on equal number of seats,” Fadnavis told reporters.

Fadnavis further asserted that the BJP is in full support of Uddhav Thackeray ji's demand of Ram Mandir in Ayodhya. We have tried to acquire 67 acres land for the temple trust, he added.

On his part, Thackeray said: “Maharashtra CM has kept forward all the important things in this press conference. I don't think I need to add anything. Before going any further, I pay my tribute to the soldiers who lost their lives in Pulwama attack. People have been seeing Shiv Sena and BJP for the past 30 years. For 25 years, we stood united, and for 5 years, there was confusion. But like the CM said, I still provided guidance to the government from time to time.”

“State Assembly Elections are also in four months, seats have been divided equally for it. Responsibilities will also be divided in half,” he added.

Amit Shah, meanwhile, expressed confidence that the alliance will win at least 45 of the total 48 Lok Sabha seats in the state. “I am confident that in Lok Sabha elections, BJP and Shiv Sena will together win 45 out of total 48 seats in Maharashtra,” he stated.

Shiv Sena leader and Uddhav Thackeray’s son Aaditya Thackeray tweeted: “An alliance of 30 years has been re-ignited and re-imagined for the Nation and Maharashtra. CM @Dev_Fadnavis ji and I thank Uddhav Thackeray ji and @AmitShah ji for their decision and to address the issues of Ram Mandir, Farmers and rural & urban Maharashtra at large.”

Last week, Fadnavis had called on the Shiv Sena president triggering speculation that the ruling alliance partners in Maharashtra and at the Centre, who had been involved in a war of words for months now over various issues, may be inching closer to sealing the deal for 2019. Fadnavis had said after the meeting that they had "positive talks" on state-related issues.

In the run-up to today’s announcement, senior Shiv Sena leaders, including Uddhav Thackeray, had been making statements, saying that they will fight the elections independently.

"Today evening Uddhavji and BJP national president Amit Shah will announce the seat-sharing formula for the Lok Sabha elections which are a couple of months away," Sena leader Sanjay Raut told news agency PTI earlier today.

In January last year, the Shiv Sena had declared that it will contest all future elections independently. However, later, the two parties had fought on some Legislative Council seats together.

The BJP and Shiv Sena had fought the 2014 Lok Sabha elections jointly. However, the BJP had split with the Shiv Sena in the run-up to the state Assembly Elections held later that year. In the 2014 state elections, the BJP had bagged 122 seats while the Sena won 63.
