India hikes customs duty on Pakistani goods to 200%

File Photo: Pakistan allows only 138 items to be imported from India over the Attari-Wagah land route. Cargo trucks from either side ccannot move beyond their border zones AFP

Indian prime minister Narendra Modi threatened to give his neighbouring country 'a jaw breaking reply'

India has increased customs duty on all goods coming from Pakistan to 200% in response to a suicide bomb attack in Kashmir which left at least 44 people dead, according to several media outlets.

Tensions between New Delhi and Islamabad have risen sharply since a militant in the Indian-administered region rammed a car laden with explosives into a convoy of military vehicles in Pulwama, killing dozens of soldiers and leaving dozens more seriously injured.

“Central government is satisfied that the import duty leviable on all goods originating in or exported from the Islamic Republic of Pakistan...should be increased and that circumstances exist which render it necessary to take immediate action,” the government said in a notification.

he move is likely to hit Pakistan’s exports to India which were $381 million in the April-November period compared with $489 million in all of FY18. India’s major imports are fruits and nuts, gypsum, sulphur, finished leather, ores, mineral oils and cement.

The new tariff of 200% is higher than India’s average bound rate for agricultural products of 113.5% and that for non-farm goods of 34.6%. The MFN applied rates are 32.8% and 10.7%, respectively for farm and non-farm products.

India’s move is in accordance with its domestic Foreign Trade (Development And Regulation) Act that allows it to prohibit, restrict or regulate the import or export of goods. It also conform to the global trade norms which do not require any country to furnish any information the disclosure of which it considers contrary to its essential security interests and allow countries any action which they consider necessary for the protection of their essential security interests.

The Indian government has accused Pakistan of having a “direct hand” in the bombing, which was claimed by Islamist militant group Jaish-e-Mohammad (JeM), which is based in the country.

Indian prime minister Narendra Modi threatened to give his neighbouring country “a jaw breaking reply.”

His finance minister Arun Jaitley subsequently announced on Twitter that India had stripped “most favoured nation” (MFN) status from Pakistan and had raised basic customs duty on Pakistani goods “with immediate effect.”

Jaitley later told reporters: “The ministry of external affairs will initiate all possible steps, and I am here referring to all possible diplomatic steps, which have to be taken to ensure the complete isolation from the international community of Pakistan.”

The two main goods imported from Pakistan are fruits and cement, according to The Times of India. Prior to the new 200% tariff, customs duty on various fruits ranged between 30-50%, while the duty on cement was 7.5%, the newspaper reported.

Annual bilateral trade between the two countries is thought to be around $2bn (£1.55bn).

Following the attack, the White House urged Pakistan “to end immediately the support and safe haven provided to all terrorist groups operating on its soil.”

Kashmir is divided between India and Pakistan but has long been a disputed territory claimed fully by both countries. In recent years, younger Kashmiris have openly supported rebels advocating to break away from India.

Anti-Pakistan protests were held in Indian cities, including Mumbai, in the aftermath of the attack.
