Stable Afghanistan in favor of entire region, including Saudi: Al-Jubeir – Afghanistan Times

AT News Report

KABUL: Saudi Arabia Foreign Minister Adel bin Ahmed Al-Jubeir, who is currently in a today days visit to Pakistan—a neighboring state that Kabul administration has so many issues with, said Monday that peace in Afghanistan is in the best interest of entire region that all would be benefited in different areas.

Appearing in a joint media briefing with his Pakistani counterpart Shah Mahmood Qureshi in Islamabad, he said that peace in Afghanistan would be of “benefit” to the entire region, including Saudi Arabia.

Al Jubeir said that the Saudi Arabia had been working with Pakistan, Afghanistan, the United States and the United Arab Emirates to “facilitate an agreement between the Taliban and Afghan government” in order to “move Afghanistan towards peace”.

He accused Iran of providing arms to terrorist groups and interfering in other countries’ affairs as well as “harboring” terrorists of Al Qaeda, “including Osama bin Laden’s son”.

“Saudi Arabia has been a victim of terrorism,” he asserted. “We have been vigilant and unmerciful in going after the terrorists and those who support them and condone them.”

“We wish to eliminate the scourge of terrorism from the face of this planet,” he said, adding that the Iranian regime was “deflecting blame because it was facing pressure from the people”.

Saudi Arabia’s Crown Prince Mohammed bin Salman has arrived Pakistan on Sunday at the start of his tour of South Asia and China, but the visit risks being overshadowed by escalating tensions between three nuclear countries, Indian and Iran.

The crown prince’s arrival comes amid a vow by India to isolate Pakistan internationally following the deadliest attack in Kashmir in decades.

The trip comes days after a suicide bomber killed 40 CRPF personnel in Jammu and Kashmir’s Pulwama. New Delhi has accused Pakistan of having a hand in the bombing and vowed to punish Islamabad, which denies involvement.

The Pakistan-based Islamist militant group Jaish-e-Mohammad (JeM) claimed responsibility for the attack, which was carried out by a 22-year-old man who was born in Indian Kashmir.

This comes while on Saturday, Iran echoed India’s complaints, blaming Pakistan-based militants for the deaths of 27 Revolutionary Guards in a suicide bombing near the Iranian-Pakistani border earlier this week.

The Pakistan-based militant group Jaish-ul-Ad, which says it seeks greater rights for ethnic minority Baluchis, claimed responsibility for the attack.

“How did they [the terrorists] cross the border? And why has this neighbouring country become a safe haven for these terrorist groups?” Iranian Maj-Gen Yahya Rahim Safavi said, according to Iran-based Tasnim News Agency.

Saudi Crown Prince Mohammad Bin Salman arrived in Islamabad on two days tripe on Sunday and signed several Memorandums of Understanding (MoUs) for Saudi investment worth $20 billion in Pakistan in coming years.
