Bragging rips question veil

Narendra Modi and Amit Shah make it sound like they are the only patriotic people left in this country: Mamata Banerjee

No other world leader has the political will that our leader Narendrabhai has to deal with terrorism

The key questions asked by the Trinamul leader who made it clear she was speaking out only because of the statements made by Modi and Shah and provocative steps by the Sangh parivar aimed at fomenting trouble:

On a day BJP chief Amit Shah declared Narendra Modi as the strongest-willed leader in the world in fighting terrorism, chief minister Mamata Banerjee said she was being compelled to break her solidarity-driven silence and ask searching questions on the Pulwama attack.

How did you allow Pakistan to do it? What action have you taken in five years? Just before the elections, you thought it’s important to wage a war, a shadow war, to toy with the lives of the people?

Just before elections, after Parliament is over, why has this happened? I don’t know…. As a citizen, I have these questions, which have remained.

Why were 2,500 jawans being taken in a 78-car convoy, why was it allowed when the government had intelligence inputs? The information was very clear, that it was known, that it was likely. Why was there no prior action? Why so many people had to die? These questions remain in the minds of everyone….

The CRPF had requested an airlift. Why was that not done? How much do you spend on publicity?

Who is a Pak premi? Where are they hidden? Everybody outside the BJP-VHP-RSS is a Pak-premi?”

Amid complaints of intimidation, the chief minister said she had asked police down the line to constables to take action against provocative instances aimed at creating communal disharmony.

Prime Minister Modi has been referring to “boiling blood” and “fire raging in your hearts” in an apparent attempt to steer the narrative ahead of the polls although the Opposition has refrained for conducting a post-mortem of the Pulwama attack immediately and pledged full support to the government.

Shah, who has also been keeping in a similar vein, said in Jaipur on Monday that “every leader across the globe is against terrorism but none has the political will Modi possesses to fight terrorism”.

Speaking in Calcutta a few hours later, Mamata said: “We were quiet, all of us in the national Opposition had decided to stand by the Centre after the incident, because we needed to stand united in this hour. But Modibabu and Shahji are regularly politicising this in their speeches, their speeches make it sound like they are the only patriotic people left in this country, while everyone else is a foreigner, everybody else is a terrorist, this is not correct.”

“Four days, we said nothing…. But seeing what they have been doing over the past two days, I had to end my silence. Modibabu and Shahji… if you will not carry out your responsibilities and duties, not accept the responsibility and resign… at least do not encourage injustice, in the name of justice, to those who have done nothing to deserve it,” she added.
