Choked drains flood three Kalina societies

debris

sewage water

slum rehabilitation project

construction material

Locals claim they had to ferry people on bikes and in cars to navigate through the slush and muck; BMC began clearing the area late on Sunday

BMC

Residents had to break down a connecting compound wall to access a back gate to get to the main road

Residents accuse builder of an adjacent SRA project of deliberately filling up the drains withto enable passage of heavy construction vehicles.Three societies on Kalina’s Manipada Road - Mini Rose, Red Rose and Parkbay -were submerged insince Friday due to choked storm water drains, restricting movements of residents, and at times even forcing them to stay indoors.Some had to break down the connecting compound wall between Red Rose and Mini Rose to access a back gate to get to the main road.Since February 15, the whole stretch at Manipada Road beginning from CST Road right up to its end was flooded with sewage water overflowing from a clogged stormwater drain (SWD) and also seeping into society compounds.Residents have alleged that this was mainly due to excavation water from an under-constructiontaking place next to Red Rose being pumped into the drainage system of the area. Additionally, heavy vehicles transporting, debris and equipment have caused heavy damage to the drain, manholes and water pipelines, residents claim.Paulson, Treasurer, Red Rose CHS told Mirror, “This has caused a lot of inconvenience and nuisance to us, blocking our access and causing a health hazard. We were completely trapped and stranded inside. We had to break a compound wall to exit from the other society. What if there was an emergency?”“We had no exit from our building. We had to ferry people on bikes and in cars to go to the main road. The builder has deliberately blocked the SWD so that heavy trucks can ply on this road,” alleged Vivek Aman, resident, Parkbay society.PO Thomas, chairman, Red Rose CHS claimed, “Kalpataru Builders are pumping slurry into the drainage. They have also narrowed a 22-feet road along the SWD that existed since 1969 to 12-feet.”Given their proximity to Mithi River, they are even dreading the upcoming monsoons.“We are staring at a nightmare,” lamented Aman.This, however, is not their first jostle with the authorities over flooding.Residents of Red Rose and Mini Rose had moved the Bombay High Court in 2017 to clear the road of encroachments and to also get the SWDs cleaned.“In June 2018, we were compelled to file a contempt petition against theas it failed to take any action. After the court asked us to name officials, we named civic chief Ajoy Mehta, and Alka Sasane, assistant commissioner of H(East) ward in the contempt petition.”“Then construction of the SRA project began six months ago,” said Abraham Mathai, from Mini Rose.Allegedly, a heavy truck damaged a portion of the SWD in October, and instead of repairing it the builder had it filled with construction debris to make way for the heavy vehicles.Residents are also accusing the BMC of turning a blind eye to the blatant flouting of norms and encouraging illegal activities.Despite several attempts, Sasane didn’t respond to any calls.Anand Wagralkar, deputy municipal commissioner promised strict action against the culprits.Kartik Gandhi, assistant engineer, SWD department, H (East) ward said, “We have deployed manpower to clear the sewage and the work is ongoing. The dewatering of the construction project choked the sewer lines. Somebody put debris in the SWDs. I will send my team to inspect. If Kalpataru Builders are involved, we will take action.”When contacted, a spokesperson of Kalpataru said, “We take care of all issues pertaining to development. We don’t do anything which is not as per the framework of the law. We have got all the approvals. The allegations are all untrue. We are not dumping rubble into the drains. Whatever material is carried by trucks, it goes through a designated road.”
