Karnataka bandh: Trade unions' strike: Buses, autos to stay off road, banks work may be hit in Karnataka

Decision left to schools, colleges

WHAT’S OFF:

WHAT’S ON:

UNDECIDED:

BENGALURU: Commuting in Bengaluru is likely to be disrupted on Tuesday and Wednesday in the wake of a two-day nationwide protest called by trade unions against the Centre’s anti-labour policies.KSRTC and BMTC buses, autorickshaws and banking services are likely to be affected. App-based cabs and airport taxis and Metro trains will operate. There’s on clarity yet on education institutions and cinema theatres.Members of the All-India Trade Union Congress said they will hold demonstrations at Jigani, Bommasandra, Whitefield, Peenya and Doddaballapura, besides staging a procession from Town Hall to Freedom Park beginning around Tuesday noon.Chandregowda S, a treasurer with the KSRTC Staff and Workers’ Federation, said workers from KSRTC’s northwestern and northeastern wings, too, will participate in the protest. “We are against the road safety bill that targets drivers. Around 1.25 lakh employees will strike work and 26,500 buses will not operate. This includes BMTC services,” he added.KSRTC managing director Shivayogi C Kalasad said they have requested labour union members not to disrupt the operations and hinted at a decision by Monday evening. BMTC managing director NV Prasad said a meeting on Monday will decide on alternative arrangements, if required.Rudramurthy, general secretary of CITU-affiliated Autorickshaw Drivers’ Union, said three-wheelers will not ply on both days. Tanveer Pasha, president, Bangalore Uber Ola Drivers’ Association, said they have decided to lend moral support, considering drivers will lose earnings if they participate in the strike. Karnataka Film Chamber of Commerce president SA Chinne Gowda said movie theatre owners were holding discussions on screenings. If protests turn intense, then screening could be called off.Two major bank unions — All-India Bank Employees’ Association and Bank Employees’ Federation of India — have informed the Indian Banks’ Association their members will take part in the strike. “We expect 25 crore workers to join the strike, largely from the unorganised sector, and 6 lakh from banks,” Vishwas Tyagi, association secretary, bank employees’ association.IDBI Bank, Bank of Baroda, Allahabad Bank and Karur Vysya Bank, among others, have informed BSE banking services are likely to be hit. Insurance and telecom sectors could take a hit as LIC, GIC and BSNL employees are participating in the strike.Since there’s no clarity on declaring a holiday, management associations have left the decision to schools and colleges. Some schools have declared a holiday because bus drivers are likely to join the agitation.D Shashi Kumar, general secretary, Associated Managements of Primary and Secondary Schools in Karnataka, said they were not supporting the protest, but have asked schools to take appropriate measures keeping children’s safety in mind. “In central business district and industrial hubs which could witness large protests, we’ve asked schools to take a call studying the situation,” he added.Anganwadis will remain shut, said S Varalakshmi, president, Karnataka State Anganwadi Workers’ Association.Buses, autorickshaws, cargo vehicles, banks, anganwadis, telecom and insuranceCabs, Metro, trains and flightsSchools, colleges and movie theatres
