Befitting reply not going to take away sorrow of Pulwama attack: Karnataka CM Kumaraswamy

File Image of Karnataka Chief Minister HD Kumaraswamy | Photo Credit: ANI

Bengaluru: Downplaying India’s attempts to avenge the death of CRPF jawans killed in Pulwama terror attack, Karnataka Chief Minister HD Kumaraswamy, on Tuesday, said a befitting reply is not going to take away the sorrow of the incident.

“A befitting reply is not going to take away the sorrow of the incident, the government has to take steps to ensure such an atmosphere doesn't arise,” he told reporters.

When asked about chorus growing to declare Pakistan as a terror state, Kumaraswamy said, “We have to solve the terrorism crisis in our country first.”

On February 18, 40 security personnel lost their lives and several others were injured after a Jaish-e-Mohammad (JeM) terrorist rammed an explosive-laden car into a CRPF convoy in Awantipora of South Kashmir’s Pulwama district. The convoy comprised 78 buses in which around 2500 personnel were travelling from Jammu to Srinagar.

Following the ghastly attack, Prime Minister Narendra Modi promised “stern action” against the perpetrators of the terror strike while saying that “time for dialogue with Pakistan is over”. Prime Minister Modi also warned that if someone teases new India, it will not let it go unpunished.

However, some political leaders have called for peace talks between India and Pakistan to resolve the issue of terrorism.

Earlier, Punjab cabinet minister Navjot Singh Sidhu had said that entire Pakistan or an individual cannot be held responsible for the Pulwama attack. "For a handful of people, can you blame the entire nation and can you blame an individual? It is a cowardly act and I condemn it firmly. Violence is always condemnable and those who did it must be punished,” he had said.

National Conference chief Farooq Abdullah has also, time and again, opposed the ‘tit for tat’ policy and asked the governments of both Indian and Pakistan to find an amicable solution to restore peace in Kashmir.
