Pakistan PM Imran Khan denies role in Pulwama attack, threatens 'retaliation'

Pakistan PM Imran Khan delivering an address on Radio Pakistan on Pulwama attack/ Twitter: Radio Pakistan | Photo Credit: Twitter

Islamabad: Pakistan PM Imran Khan, on Tuesday, denied his country's hand in orchestrating the February 14 Pulwama attack that resulted in the death of 40 CRPF jawans, arguing that it was 'not in Pakistan's interest'. Delivering an address on Radio Pakistan — his first comment on the matter since the attack — Khan promised that his government will extend full support if India provides 'actionable intelligence' on the Pulwama terror attack.

"My statement is for the Indian government. You (Indian govt) have blamed the Pakistan government without any evidence. If Pakistan was planning the visit of Crown Prince of Saudi Arabia, what does it stand to gain out of this? Pakistan ko isse kya faayda hai? Kyu Pakistan karega iss stage ke upar jab Pakistan stability ki taraf ja raha hai?," he said, adding, "It is in our interest that nobody from our soil spreads violence. I want to tell the Indian govt that we will take action if evidence is found against anyone from Pakistan.

"India needs to introspect," Khan said, accusing the Indian government of 'oppression' of people of Jammu and Kashmir. Khan said that since it is the election year in India, a 'lesson' to Pakistan would have electoral gains. Reacting to voices of dissent from within the Indian establishment, including the chorus of a 2016-like surgical strike on Pakistan, Khan said that in such a scenario, Pakistan will not just 'think of retaliation, but it will retaliate'.

This is the first official comment from Khan on the dastardly attack on CRPF personnel by a Jaish-e-Mohammed suicide bomber on February 14. The Pakistani PM failed to even acknowledge, leave alone condole the deaths in the dastardly attack, even on his otherwise busy twitter handle. Minutes after the attack that killed 40 CRPF men in Pulwama in South Kashmir, Pakistan-backed terror group JeM had claimed responsibility for the attack.
