Demonetisation wasn't a jhatka, gave enough warnings against black money: PM Modi to ANI

Prime Minister Narendra Modi today dismissed the perception around the 2016 demonetisation scheme being a jolt to the country. Speaking to news agency ANI, PM Modi said that the scheme, which banned currency notes of the denomination of Rs 1,000 and Rs 500 was "not a jhatka" (shock).

"This wasn't a jhatka. We had warned people a year before, that if you have such wealth (black money), you can deposit it, pay penalties and you will be helped out. However, they thought Modi too would behave like others so very few came forward voluntarily," he said.

#ModiInterview

Demonetisation was necessary for wiping out black money, says PM @narendramodi. Watch his first interview of 2019.

Live: https://t.co/4fqxBVUizL pic.twitter.com/IqZyLCCdww India Today (@IndiaToday) January 1, 2019

Modi said the government had given multiple warnings to those who hoarded black money before the November 8, 2016 announcement. He said the government gave them the opportunity to declare their wealth and pay penalties.

The prime minister claimed that people did not take the government's warning seriously and did not think he would follow through on his promise of bringing back black money to the country and hence did not come forward.

Modi also credited the demonetisation for instilling fear in the minds of economic offenders like Nirav Modi, Vijay Mallya and Mehul Choksi - leading them to flee the country.

On the question of whether the demonetisation cost the Bharatiya Janata Party success in assembly elections, the prime minister said, "There was a need for formalisation of the economy. The parallel economy [black money] had hollowed the core of India's economy. Demonetisation has done the biggest thing - wealth stored in gunny bags will enter the system."

He said the scheme has led to an "environment of honesty" in the country.

The government has been under severe attack for demonetisation. Many had criticised the demonetisation for being sudden and unplanned. Critics have also questioned whether the move served its intended purpose.

The Opposition has also termed the scheme a "scam". Congress president Rahul Gandhi had alleged that demonetisation was carried out to take money away from the poor and distribute it among friends of Modi and BJP chief Amit Shah. "Demonetisation was the biggest scam in the world," he said.

Economic experts have blamed the note ban for bringing down India's economic growth. "Demonetisation slowed down India's economic growth at a time when the world economy was growing and it impacted the GDP significantly", former RBI Governor Raghuram Rajan had said.

The government has continued to defend the move. Finance Minister Arun Jaitley earlier said demonetisation resulted in the formalisation of the economy and increased tax base, prompting the government to earmark more resources for the poor and infrastructure development.
