Amarinder Singh to Imran Khan: Masood Azhar is in Bahawalpur. Arrest him, or we will

If you cannot arrest Masood Azhar, we'll do it for you -- that's the essence of a Twitter message Punjab Chief Minister Amarinder Singh sent Imran Khan on Tuesday, soon after the Pakistan Prime Minister defended his country from blame for the terrorist attack in Pulwama.

"Dear Imran Khan," Amarinder Singh wrote, "you have Jaish chief Masood Azhar sitting in Bahawalpur and masterminding the attacks with ISI help."

"Go pick him up from there. If you can't, let us know, we'll do it for you."

Dear @ImranKhanPTI you have Jaish chief Masood Azhar sitting in Bahawalpur & masterminding the attacks with ISI help. Go pick him up from there. If you can’t let us know, we’ll do it for you. BTW what has been done about the proofs of Mumbai’s 26/11 attack. Time to walk the talk. pic.twitter.com/Zct6I7QieY Capt.Amarinder Singh (@capt_amarinder) February 19, 2019

40 CRPF soldiers were killed last week in a suicide attack carried out in Kashmir's Pulwama district by Jaish-e-Mohammed, a Pakistan-based terrorist group led by Masood Azhar. The mastermind of the attack and two other terrorists were killed by security forces in an encounter on Monday.

In a address broadcast on Tuesday, Imran Khan accused India of blaming Pakistan for the attack without proof, and said his country was ready to hold talks on terrorism.

He also promised action if New Delhi provided actionable evidence against Islamabad, and threatened to retaliate if India attacked Pakistan.

"What has been done about the proofs of Mumbai’s 26/11 attack?" asked Amarinder Singh in his tweet. "Time to walk the talk."

After Pakistan Prime Minister Imran Khan asked India to provide proof of the country's role in the Pulwama terror attack, he said, "What more proof does he want? JeM chief Masood Azhar is sitting there. Will they accept when we show them bodies of the terrorists killed by our forces? So what kind of a statement is this? Whole world knows the truth."

On Monday, Punjab's state lawmakers decided to donate one month's salary each to the next of kin of the martyred CRPF soldiers.

The Punjab Assembly unanimously adopted a resolution, moved by Congress MLA Parminder Singh Pinki, to donate to the martyrs' families.
