Pakistan ‘ready to talk’ on Kashmir, warns India against attack: Khan

ISLAMABAD, Feb 19, 2019 (BSS/AFP) – Pakistan is ready to help India

investigate the deadliest blast in Kashmir in decades, but will retaliate if

Delhi attacks, Prime Minister Imran Khan said Tuesday as tensions between the

nuclear-armed rivals soared.

Khan used a nationally televised address to demand Delhi share proof of

Islamabad’s alleged involvement in last week’s suicide blast, which killed 41

people in Indian-held Kashmir and unleashed a fresh diplomatic crisis over

the disputed Himalayan region.

The attack, which has triggered nationwide anger in India, was claimed by

Pakistan-based militant group Jaish-e-Mohammed.

Indian officials have said those behind the blast will pay a “heavy

price”. The Indian military also said Tuesday the bombing had been

“masterminded” by Pakistan, and specifically its powerful Inter-Services

Intelligence branch.

If India attacks, “Pakistan won’t just think to retaliate. Pakistan will

retaliate,” said Khan in the address.

Islamabad has denied involvement. “If you have some actionable

intelligence about involvement of Pakistanis, give it to us, I guarantee you

that we will take action,” Khan said Tuesday, adding that Pakistan was “ready

to talk” about terrorism with India.

It was “easy to start a war”, he said, adding that he hopes “better sense

will prevail”.

Kashmir has been split between India and Pakistan since independence from

Britain in 1947. Both countries claim the Himalayan territory in full and

have fought two wars in connection to the dispute.

India has long accused Pakistan of harbouring militants that launch

attacks on its soil, including banned groups such as JeM and Lashkar-e-Taiba,

blamed for carrying out the 2008 Mumbai attacks which left scores dead.

Islamabad has repeatedly vowed to crack down on the groups if Delhi

provides evidence of involvement.

Khan said on Tuesday that if any militant group was using Pakistani soil

to launch attacks, “its enmity is with us. This is against our interest”.

Pakistan was also accused by Iran last week of sheltering the perpetrators

of an attack which killed 27 Revolutionary Guards, while Kabul and Washington

have long claimed that Islamabad offers safe haven to the Afghan Taliban.

– ‘Defuse tensions’ –

With anger building in India, Prime Minister Narendra Modi faces increased

pressure to act as his Hindu nationalist government is expected to call a

national election within weeks.

Indian forces have staged operations since Thursday’s attack while anti-

Pakistan and anti-Kashmir sentiment has spread across the country, fuelled by

social media including widely shared false news reports.

On Tuesday the Indian army said three JeM militants were killed in a gun

battle a day earlier.

Two of them were Pakistanis, including the group’s “chief operations

commander in Kashmir”, Lieutenant General Kanwal Jeet Singh Dhillon told a

press conference in Srinagar.

The Indian government has already withdrawn trade privileges for Pakistan,

ended police protection for four Kashmiri separatist leaders, and halted some

cross-border services.

Earlier Tuesday, Pakistani Foreign Minister Shah Mahmood Qureshi pleaded

with UN Secretary General Antonio Guterres to intervene in the escalating

row.

“The United Nations must step in to defuse tensions,” wrote Qureshi in a

message shared with journalists.

UN rights commissioner Michelle Bachelet released a statement saying she

hoped the intensifying dispute “will not add further to the insecurity in the

region”.

On Monday Saudi Arabia vowed to “de-escalate” the situation during a high-

profile state visit by Crown Prince Mohammed bin Salman to Islamabad. He is

also due in India this week.

Kashmir is one of the world’s most militarised zones, with some 500,000

Indian troops deployed to fight a rebellion that broke out in 1989.

Scores of armed groups are now involved.

Tens of thousands of people, mainly civilians, have died in the conflict.

Violence has spiked since 2016 with almost 600 killed last year, the highest

toll in a decade.
