NSF raises angry fist against Citizenship Bill

State-wide strike announced for Jan. 8

Dimapur, Jan. 6 (EMN): The Naga Students’ Federation (NSF) has announced a strike across Nagaland on Jan. 8 protesting the controversial citizenship Bill that the organisation says will damage the cultural integrity of the indigenous communities—a sentiment echoed by other indigenous leadership in Northeast India.

The NSF issued a statement on Monday denouncing the bill and the government of India for pushing the bill. The organisation warned the Indian government that it should not “gamble with the future of the Indigenous people of NE.”

The statement read: “The NSF as a constituent unit of Neso (North East Students’ Organisation) has consistently and vigorously appraised and appeal the government of India on the Citizenship (Amendment) Bill 2016 and its detrimental effect if the bill is pass and the crisis arising out of the unabated influx of illegal migrants from Bangladesh, which has brought about serious damage and challenges to the indigenous people of Northeast region.”

The Citizenship (Amendment) Bill was introduced in the Lok Sabha on July 16, 2016. It intends to amend the Citizenship Act of 1955 and give Indian citizenships to migrants based on religious preference especially to those from Afghanistan, Bangladesh and Pakistan.

The NSF and Neso stated to have met with the Joint Parliamentary Committee on several occasions to “show its resentment against the bill and also presented its detrimental effect on the indigenous people of Northeast if the bill is passed.”

The NSF denounced the statement of the prime minister of India to table said bill and pass it. The NSF will impose a total strike on Jan. 8 from 5:00 am to 4:00 pm. The NSF’s federating units and subordinate bodies are directed to enforce the ‘bandh’ in their respective jurisdiction. The statement carried an appeal to the state’s civil society, business community and the public in general to cooperate.

Exemption: The Press and media; medical, administrative authorities; police; paramilitary; “pre-engaged programs like wedding, conventions and conferences (should possess card and programme copy)”; and students returning to their places of study. Students in said category are to possess tickets for their journey, the press release added.

Chakhesang Student’s Union supports bandh

The Chakhesang Student’s Union (CSU) has announced its co-operation on the bandh called by the North East Students Organisation (NESO) and Naga Students’ Federation (NSF) on Jan. 8 in protest against the controversial Citizenship (Amendment) Bill, 2016.

The union has appealed to the district administration, law enforcing agencies, business establishments and educational institutions to remain closed in support of the protest, stating that the Bill is a threat to the rights of indigenous people. It has also sought the co-operation and support from its affiliated units, student leaders, right-thinking citizens, and general public.

However, the union said that weddings and medical emergencies will be exempted from the bandh.
