We Shall First Have To Give Up This Hubris Of Considering Tribes Backward: Vice President -

The Vice President of India, Shri M. Venkaiah Naidu has said that we have to give up the hubris of considering tribes backward and every tribe has a rich and living cultural tradition and we must respect them. It not only social courtesy to respect their cultural traditions but it is also our Constitutional obligation, he added. He was delivering the Foundation Day Lecture ‘Constitution and Tribes’, on the occasion of 15th Foundation Day Celebrations of National Commission for Scheduled Tribes, here today. The Vice President said that as we are looking for ways of sustainable development, these tribal groups can teach us lessons in sustainable development.

Shri Naidu said that that every tribal community world over, worships nature in its different forms. He further said that their methods of worship may be different, but their belief in the Nature remains one and firm. There can’t be a better example of Unity in Diversity, he added.The Vice President cautioned that in the name of protecting their cultural identity, we must not isolate them from the national mainstream. Their youth should have voice and opportunity to express their aspirations and expectations and only then our commitment for Sabka saath sabka Vikas will be fulfilled, he said. In this context, the Vice President also referred to several steps taken by the Government for the financial inclusion like JanDhan, MUDRA, and Stand up India.

The Vice President also suggested that the Governor’s Reports on Tribal areas should be placed before the Parliament and appropriate Parliamentary Committee should examine them. Remembering former Prime Minister, Shri Atal Behari Vajpayee, the Vice President recalled that it was Atal ji who established a separate Ministry for Tribal Affairs and formed a separate National Commission for Scheduled Tribes, to address their issues effectively and expeditiously. He said that Atal ji not only started Connectivity Revolution in the country but he also had the courage behind Operation Shakti at Pokhran.

The Union Minister for Tribal Affairs, Shri Jual Oram, the Chairperson, National Commission for Tribal Affairs, Dr. Nand Kumar Sai, the Vice Chairperson, National Commission for Tribal Affairs, Ms. Anusuiya Uikey, the Secretary, NCST, Shri A.K. Singh and other dignitaries were present on the occasion.
