Will expose BJP’s doublespeak on statehood issue, vows AAP

Aam Aadmi Party to distribute previous manifestos of the BJP

The Aam Aadmi Party (AAP) on Tuesday said it would expose the “real anti-Delhi character” of the opposition Bharatiya Janata Party (BJP) in the upcoming Lok Sabha elections through its doublespeak on the issue of statehood for the Capital.

Even as AAP announced that it would launch a “full scale struggle” which would include the distribution of previous manifestos of the BJP in which the party had pitched for statehood for Delhi as one of its significant promises, the BJP accused AAP of “flogging a dead horse” in relation to the issue which, it argued, had “been rejected” by the people of Delhi.

“AAP will launch a full-scale struggle to tell the people of Delhi that the Narendra Modi-Amit Shah duo’s BJP has no respect even for the founding fathers of their own party -- late Atal Bihari Vajpayee and L.K. Advani. The duo has ruthlessly shattered their dream of granting statehood to Delhi,” AAP said in a statement.

The statement said “Would take to the people all the manifestos of BJP released in previous polls, including the latest Delhi-specific manifesto for the 2014 LS polls, in which the BJP had promised statehood for Delhi, if it was voted to power.”

The BJP’s Leader of Opposition in the Delhi Assembly Vijender Gupta said Delhi Chief Minister and AAP convener Arvind Kejriwal was raising “this dead issue” to “hide his failure to perform during the last four years.”

Twitter war

Mr. Kejriwal later engaged Union Minister and former Delhi BJP chief Vijay Goel on Twitter over the issue after Mr. Goel accused him of non-performance in office. “Kejriwal wants full statehood so that he can get more power to misuse, as per our surveys. Attempts should have been made to improve the condition of health, education, roads and traffic by him (Sic.)” Mr. Goel said.

Mr. Kejriwal replied by saying, “Mr. Goel, you are insulting the people. You will not give the government chosen by the people the power to serve the people? What do you mean? Who are you to decide? India became a democracy not because of the BJP but because of the sacrifices of our soldiers. The people of Delhi will achieve democracy, if the BJP has the strength to stop them, let it try (Sic.)”

Delhi voters, the AAP said, gave the BJP all seven LSseats in 2014 “only to be deceived by the Modi-Shah duo” which “does not like Delhi at all.” “The party will tell the people of Delhi that it is time for them to decide that hollow promises and falsehoods will no longer be tolerated and only those who are willing to take up the cause of people of Delhi will be elected to Lok Sabha now,” the statement said.

The AAP also intends to take door-to-door the May, 2015 notification of the Modi government which “snatched away the legal powers of the elected Delhi government.”

Mr. Gupta attacked Mr. Kejriwal for his repeated attempts at raking up the issue. “He raised a demand for full statehood in 2015 itself. Again, in 2016, AAP prepared draft of Delhi State Bill and put it in its election campaign. It called for special session of Delhi Assembly on June 6, 2018 for full statehood,” Mr. Gupta said.

“It (AAP) claimed to have launched a march on Delhi roads with signature of citizens in support of its demand. None of it’s attempts to demand statehood for Delhi succeeded in winning Delhiites to the cause...CM Kejriwal has chosen to raise this dead issue to hide his government’s utter failure to govern and perform during the last four years,” he added.
