Police nab inter-state burglars; recover property worth 32 lakh

Hyderabad: Two inter-state burglars were arrested by the Rachakonda police for their involvement in house breaking offences across seven States. The police also recovered 94 tolas gold ornaments and other material all worth Rs 32 lakh.According to police, Bharath Bhushan Bansal (52) native of Jhansi in UP and Mathura Prasad (42) native of Madhya Pradesh committed burglaries in MP, UP, Rajasthan, Maharashtra, Tamil Nadu, Telangana and Karnataka.

Their modus operandi involved sending their two-wheeler to targeted city via Railway courier service from Jhansi or Gwalior. Afterwards they reached by train within 10 to 15 days. After arriving at the targeted city, they would change the number of the vehicle and take shelter in lodgings close to railway station, while claiming they were on a business visit (marbles). After doing a recce of a particular area away from the targeted city, they would indulge in burglary.

To avoid any possibility of getting caught, the duo would hide the booty inside vehicle’s utility box till they reach the Railway station. Upon arrival at the station, they would board a train to Jhansi, where they disposed of the gold ornaments and other items. Sometimes in order to target the same city, they would park the vehicle at its railway station for days.

After noticing a series of day house breaking offences in the month of January-2019, police took it as a challenge and formed three teams and also verified CCTV footages within a radius of 55-65 kms from the scene of offence. “These strenuous efforts led to a small clue of CCTV footage collected nearby NH-65(Deer Park), Hayathnagar.

With this vital clue the entire crime team with the help of identified crime hotspots and other strategic entry and escape routes zeroed in on them. A trap was laid by deputing crime surveillance team across the Commissionerate which ended in the apprehension of the accused,” said Mahesh M Bhagwat, Rachakonda Police Commissioner.


