Devendra Fadnavis sets BJP target of winning 40 of 48 LS seats

MUMBAI: Indicating that hopes of forging a fresh alliance with the Shiv Sena are dim, chief minister Devendra Fadnavis said on Sunday that the BJP should aim to win 40 of the 48 Lok Sabha seats in the state. Fadnavis made the statement at a meeting of BJP workers at Latur where party chief Amit Shah was also present.In a veiled warning to the Sena, BJP president Amit Shah said that if an alliance happened, the party will ensure victory for its allies, but if it did not, the party will thrash its former allies in the coming Lok Sabha polls. “Party workers should get rid of confusion about (prospects of) alliance (with the Shiv Sena). If the allies join us, we will ensure their win, or else will defeat them too. Party workers should start preparations at every booth,” said Shah, who was in Latur to hold discussions with party workers from Latur, Osmanabad, Hingoli and Nanded.“The party president will decide what to do with the Shiv Sena and the proposed alliance...Party workers should be ready for contesting elections without any ally. If the workers resolve, all these four LS seats can be won,” said the CM.Reacting to Shah’s statement, a Shiv Sena spokesperson said their party is ready to accept the challenge. “The people from Maharashtra will defeat the BJP in the upcoming elections and show the party its place. Shah’s arrogant and manic statements have exposed him and his party. Sena chief Uddhav Thackeray has expressed the sentiments of the Hindus and it seems the slogan, ‘Har Hindu Ki Yehi Pukaar, Pahle Mandir Fir Sarkar’ has irked BJP.” The spokesperson added that the BJP has lost its morale after its defeat in five states. “BJP’s announcement that it will win 40 out of 48 Lok Sabha seats in the state shows their overconfidence and it is likely they will have an ‘alliance’ with the EVMs.”Shah had reportedly told party MPs from Maharashtra at a meeting in Delhi last week that they should be ready to contest the polls without an alliance, though efforts to forge a pre-poll tie-up with the Sena were on. The BJP is in alliance with the Shiv Sena in Maharashtra and at the Centre. The Sena has been critical of BJP and its party leaders have often spoken of contesting the 2019 Lok Sabha elections alone.
