Kerala Tourism premieres Human by Nature campaign

Actress Shobana, tourism Minister Kadakampally Surendran, tourism secretary Rani George and tourism director P Bala Kiran during the launch of Human by Nature in New Delhi

New Delhi: Kerala Tourism has unveiled the global premier of a new brand campaign, Human by Nature, which encapsulates the state’s enticing charm in dramatic visuals and offers refreshing insights.

The three-minute destination campaign film, part of a marketing blitzkrieg to refurbish Kerala’s touristy appeal beyond the Indian shores, not only showcases the state’s signature assets, but also celebrates local people as heroes.

The global brand campaign was launched on Monday by Tourism Minister Kadakampally Surendran in the presence of Tourism Secretary Rani George and Tourism director P Bala Kiran. The film was unveiled by famed classical danseuse and actress Shobana.

The sleek film packs soul-stirring images of the state where life moves at a leisurely pace in tranquil environs, where culture flourishes in syncretic traditions, where tradition complements modernity in the context of everyday life, all strung together in a visual tapestry.

Alongside, it offers a spectacular snapshot of the state – tranquil backwaters, beaches, houseboats, catamarans, Theyyam artistes, hill stations, exotic wildlife, magical festivals, and scrumptious cuisines, and there is a surreal feel to it that is both real and fantastical for tourists. In essence, Human by Nature presents Kerala as ‘the courtyard of the world’, where no one is an outsider, not even the traveller.

Describing the latest campaign as a powerful multi-media outreach, Mr Surendran said it would act as a trigger to put Kerala Tourism on a higher pedestal in a competitive global marketplace.

“I am sure it will strike an emotive chord with travellers and position Kerala as an essential fixture on the international travel circuit. It will appeal to both high spenders and backpackers”, said Mr Surendran.

The film was conceived and scripted by Stark Communications and directed by Vivek Thomas, Director of Miramar Films. It was shot in the enchanting locations like Kumarakom, Alappuzha, Arthungal, Chellanam, Fort Kochi, Munambam, Wayanad, Kannur and Taliparamba.

The premiere also witnessed a scintillating performance by Avial, the alternative Malayali rock band, besides a presentation of the state’s folk art forms Pulikali and Theyyam.

The film can be viewed on Kerala Tourism’s Facebook page.
