Short supply of seats for small parties

Prakash Ambedkar

Samajwadi Party

Swabhimani Paksha

Prakash Ambedkar

With grand alliances heading for a straight fight, fringe parties have been left with a miniscule share.Smaller political parties have been left out with Sena forging an alliance with the BJP and the Congress-NCP combine. Now that the two major coalitions in a straight fight with each other, the diminutives that were part of the alliance in 2014 seem to have lost clout and bargaining power. The seat-sharing formulas already worked out, parties like’s Bharipa Bahujan Mahasangh (BBM),and Raju Shetti’shave been asked either to come on board with limited seats or be counted out.In the saffron camp, Ramdas Athawale’s Republican Party of India (RPI) and Mahadev Jankar’s Rashtriya Samaj Paksha (RSP) will also have to settle with just one or no Lok Sabha seat at all. Keen on entering the Congress-led grand alliance, Raj Thackeray’s MNS, too, will have to settle for just one Lok Sabha seat as the Congress is dead against its formal entry into the alliance.The Congress and the NCP are expected to begin the process of finalising their first list of candidates next week. The first list will include constituencies where there is no dispute over choice of candidates, leaders from the grand alliance said. In the meantime, there are parallel turfs in need of urgent attention from the combine.While the MNS wants the Congress-NCP grand alliance to give up the Mumbai North East seat for it, the SP, it is learnt, is eyeing the Bhiwandi Lok Sabha seat from the alliance quota. On Tuesday, state Samajwadi Party chief legislator Abu Azmi, while seeking just one seat for his party, slammed the Congress-NCP bloc for informally joining forces with the MNS. “This party has consistently attacked north Indians in the city. Welcoming it into the fold will be a setback for all north Indians. We will oppose this. The Congress-NCP must keep the MNS out and give the SP one seat to fight the Shiv Sena-BJP combine,” he said.Prakash Ambedkar has also held multiple talks with state Congress chief Ashok Chavan. Though the Congress and NCP had earlier said they were ready to give four seats to Ambedkar, the BBM chief wants 12 and has already announced candidates. The Congress, which has been trying to persuade him to join the anti-BJP coalition, is said to be disappointed with his approach as he has not showing any flexibility and keenness for a tie-up. The Congress said Ambedkar is adamant to get in writing how, if the Congress comes to power, would the RSS be restrained from running a parallel administration in the country. “We too are supportive of restricting the RSS. Now, it is up to Ambedkar to respond,” Chavan said.Farmer leader Raju Shetti has also threatened to walk out of the grand alliance and contest seven seats on his own. Shetti, who is a sitting MP from Hatkanangle constituency in western Maharashtra, was part of the Sena-BJP alliance in 2014. However, he quit in March last year and met Congress president Rahul Gandhi.On the Sena-BJP front, RPI leader Athawale, who is a Rajya Sabha MP from the BJP quota, is looking at one LS seat and 16 Assembly seats. Athawale has demanded the South-Central Mumbai seat for himself, but the Sena, which holds the seat currently, has refused to vacate it for him. Meanwhile, Jankar’s RSP wants six LS and 15 Assembly seats from the Sena-BJP combine in the state but may only get one in Madha constituency, from where NCP supremo Sharad Pawar is expected to contest. A third smaller saffron ally, Shiv Sangram, is still to raise its demand. The party’s chief, Vinayak Mete, is a member of the legislative council and is unlikely to get even one Lok Sabha seat.
