Politics over Pulwama: Threat to national security due to BJP's inefficiency, says Chandrababu Naidu

Chandrababu Naidu blames the BJP's "inefficiency" for what he describes as a threat to national security in the wake of Pakistan's reaction to criticism for last week's terrorist attack in Pulwama.

In comments published by ANI, the chief minister of Andhra Pradesh accused BJP leaders of "belittling" India with their "petty" actions and "wrongdoing". He said he would not tolerate what he described as the "jeopardising" of national security for self-interest.

On Tuesday, Pakistan Prime Minister Imran Khan defended his country from blame for the Pulwama attack, carried out by the terrorist group Jaish-e-Mohammed, in which 40 Indian paramilitary soldiers were martyred. In a televised address, he threatened to retaliate if India attacked Pakistan.

Chandrababu Naidu, who leads former NDA ally Telugu Desam Party (TDP), said there were "many apprehensions" over Imran Khan's statement. He said tough action should be taken on terrorist attacks.

Andhra Pradesh CM Chandrababu Naidu: Will not tolerate jeopardizing National security for self-interests. Will not tolerate playing with Army for political gains. Tough action should be taken on terror attacks. https://t.co/USQLoTSFoR ANI (@ANI) February 20, 2019

India has killed three terrorists in Kashmir in the wake of the attack in Pulwama, including the man who masterminded it. It has said the presence of Jaish-e-Mohammed and its leader, Masood Azhar, in Pakistan should be sufficient proof for Islamabad to take action.

"The prime minister of Pakistan has offered to investigate the matter if India provides proof. This is a lame excuse," the Ministry of External Affairs said on Tuesday. "In the horrific attack in Mumbai on 26/11, proof was provided to Pakistan. Despite this, the case has not progressed for the last more than 10 years. Likewise, on the terror attack on the Pathankot airbase, there has been no progress."

Meanwhile, the Indian Army has warned parents of Kashmiri terrorists that anyone who picks up a gun in the Valley will be killed, and urged them to ask their children to surrender.
