Your morning briefing: What you should know for Wednesday, February 20

E ighth Labour MP quits in historic split

An eighth Labour MP has quit to join an independent breakaway group as a historic split continues to rock the party.

Joan Ryan said Labour has become “infected with the scourge of anti-Jewish racism” under Jeremy Corbyn.

Her resignation last night comes after a group of seven MPs quit the party on Monday, throwing the opposition into turmoil.

ISIS bride’s family in fight over her citizenship

Shamima Begum’s family lawyer has vowed to fight a move to strip the ISIS bride of her British citizenship.

Home Secretary Sajid Javid made the decision against the Londoner, who fled the UK to Syria as a schoolgirl aged 15.

Tasnime Akunjee, her family’s lawyer, said they are considering “all legal avenues” to challenge the move in the courts.

The 19-year-old’s family had been told of the move in a letter from the Home Office yesterday.

Brexit: PM faces crunch talks in Brussels

Theresa May is set to return to Brussels today for fresh Brexit talks after hopes of renegotiating her deal were once again dashed.

Jean-Claude Juncker, the European Commission President, said he does not expect a breakthrough during the discussions.

His comments came as the PM met with members of a working group seeking a compromise on the controversial backstop.

Mrs May is looking for concessions that will enable her to get her agreement through Parliament after it was rejected by MPs.

Philip Green probed over grope claim

Sir Philip Green is being investigated after a fitness instructor alleged the retail tycoon groped her at a luxury resort in 2016.

Officers in Arizona said detectives were working on a case after a woman came forward with a complaint on Monday.

His former Pilates teacher Katie Surridge reportedly said Sir Philip inappropriately touched her and made sexual comments.

A spokesman for Sir Philip denied the allegation.

Burberry sorry for ‘noose’ hoodie

Burberry has apologised for putting a hoodie with a “noose” on the London Fashion Week runway.

The luxury brand sparked a huge backlash over the gaffe, with model Liz Kennedy saying: “suicide is not fashion”.

The brand’s CEO and creative director issued apologies for the look, which was part of their Autumn/Winter 2019 collection.

The “noose” has been removed from the collection after the furore it caused following Sunday’s catwalk event.

Lagerfeld’s cat could be ‘heir’ to his fortune

Karl Lagerfeld’s cat could be in line to inherit some of the Chanel icon’s £150 million fortune after he died aged 85 yesterday.

The fashion icon had last year said that “among others” his internet-famous pet, Choupette, would receive a share of his riches.

This could actually happen if certain legal structures are arranged, it has been reported.

Tributes poured in for fashion “Kaiser” Lagerfeld after his death following a battle with pancreatic cancer.

Pop star Rihanna, model Cara Delevingne and actress Lily Collins were among the latest to pay their respects.

On this day…

1547: Coronation of nine-year-old Edward VI, only son of Henry VIII and Jane Seymour.

1938: Anthony Eden resigned as British Foreign Secretary, in protest over prime minister Neville Chamberlain's appeasement policy.

1947: Lord Louis Mountbatten was appointed the last Viceroy of India - the same day the Government announced the British would leave India by June 1948.

1962: Astronaut John Glenn became the first American in orbit when he circled the Earth three times in the Mercury capsule Friendship 7.

1985: Contraceptives were first sold in the Irish Republic.
