Rahul Gandhi’s proximity to CPM becomes a liability for Congress in Kerala

Jiby writes on politics, developmental issues & legal affairs and enjoys hunting for data to make his arguments. He works on the Edit Page at The Times of India

The murder of two Youth Congress workers in Kerala’s Kasaragod district was met with an outpouring of emotions by ordinary Congress workers in Kerala. CPM is on the backfoot and is unable to explain its affinity towards violent politics. With Lok Sabha elections approaching, CPM can say goodbye to the Kasargod, and perhaps even Kannur and Kozhikode Lok Sabha seats in Malabar. Congress president Mullappally Ramachandran, regarded as a lightweight, has suddenly emerged a bigger, saner figure after his helplessness and tears when meeting the family of the two murdered workers were beamed to thousands of homes across Kerala.

The same cannot be said for Rahul Gandhi though. Despite tweeting out his angst and anger, BJP has seized the initiative. They, and even Congress sympathisers, have latched on to the fact that Gandhi did not name the CPM in his tweet that still managed to go viral. Congress’s impending partnership with CPM in Bengal along with effusive photos of Rahul with Sitaram Yechury in the same frame have combined to blunt Congress’s campaign against CPM.

The brutal murder of two members of our Youth Congress family in Kasargod, Kerala is shocking. The Congress Party stands in solidarity with the families of these two young men & I send them my deepest condolences. We will not rest till the murderers are brought to justice. — Rahul Gandhi (@RahulGandhi) February 18, 2019

The BJP strategy is clear. It wants to label Congress as the CPM’s B-Team and has its eyes on Congress’s votebank and its cadre who have been left repeatedly disappointed by the weak Congress response to CPM’s strongarm tactics. The Sabarimala agitation was one leg of this strategy. The second is to project the BJP as the only party capable of giving a fitting response to CPM’s violent politics.

The Congress in Kerala is that rare party in India where it nets a substantial number of its votes without cadre having to even do household visits. All those fed up with CPM have angled towards Congress because of its political moderation. BJP, on the other hand, doesn’t fit the bill for voters because it is also seen in the same vein as CPM, a party with extreme views equally amenable to strong-arm tactics. Yet a party does need to maintain a strong cadre to keep up its visibility.

And this is where Rahul’s weak response will disillusion ordinary Congress workers. Considering that the Congress-led UDF earned the UPA 12 of its 60 seats in 2014 compared to just 4 from Bengal, Rahul should think twice about the utility of the tie up with CPM in Bengal that is upsetting potential ally Trinamool Congress. In the 2016 assembly elections for all the hype about the Congress-CPM tie-up Congress could win just 44 seats against the 42 won in 2011.

BJP can be expected to press home the argument that CPM and Congress are in cahoots while Kerala CPM is claiming that RSS cadres will pass their vote to Congress to wean away minorities. It is a battle of narratives in Kerala and Congress has so far failed to seize the narrative. Opinion polls predict a UDF surge in the Lok Sabha polls but that is because voters have no alternative and many believe that the vote for a national party like Congress makes more sense. The real prize for all parties is the assembly elections in 2021 and another strong showing by BJP will strike at the heart of the Congress in Kerala.

Facebook Twitter Linkedin Email Disclaimer Views expressed above are the author's own.
