Hizbul Mujahideen slams Mehbooba Mufti, calls her visit to terrorists' kin 'election drama'

Puncturing the soft-separatism balloon of Mehbooba Mufti, Hizbul Mujahideen on Sunday termed her visits to families of terrorists "nothing but an election drama". The terror outfit also asked terrorists' kin to slam doors on the former chief minister's face and not allow her to enter their homes.

Hizbul chief operations commander Riyaz Naikoo released a 20-minute audio clip threatening PDP activists for facilitating Mehbooba's visits to terrorists' families in south Kashmir region.

"Mehbooba Mufti has started a new drama. She is going to meet terrorists' families to express sympathies. She says police is receiving direction from somewhere to harass these families. When she was in power, the families of terrorists were harassed as well. Who was giving direction to police then?" asked Naikoo.

Mehbooba on Thursday visited the family of slain army soldier-turned-terrorist Idrees Sultan in Shopian, triggering a major political storm ahead of the polls in the restive state.

Last Sunday Mehbooba visited the family of a terrorist in south Kashmir's Pulwama and cautioned the government against alleged harassment of terrorists' families.

"Mehboba is shedding crocodile tears over the death of civilians and terrorists. When she was in power, civilians were killed then too. Back then she was trying to appease Delhi and BJP by giving statements that 'had they (slain) gone to buy toffees' or 'are the weapons of police and army just showpieces'? Today she is not in power and she says police is getting directions from somewhere to harass militant families", said Naikoo.

Hizbul chief, who is the Most Wanted terror Commander in Jammu and Kashmir underlined that Mehbooba's visit to the families of terrorists has much to do with the forthcoming elections. "Elections are near and that is why she is sympathising with people," he said.

Urging militant families to resist her visit, Naikoo said PDP president should not be allowed to enter their homes come what may. "Her hands are soaked in blood. I request the families of militants not allow her to enter your home. Whenever she visits you, throw her out. She is sympathetic towards India not you. When they are in power they speak one language and when they are out of power they sing a different tune", he said

Naikoo also threatened the facilitators of dire consequences for paving way for Mehbooba to visit militant families. "We know who facilitated Mehbooba to visit to militant families. They are the agents of PDP of that area. We will teach them lesson", he said.
