Yet another day in paradise?

Sunil Sharan is the author of three books: (i) Lockdown: India Under Siege from Corona (RosettaBooks), (ii) Modi 2.0: Beyond the Ordinary (Bloomsbury), and (iii) How I Came to Christ (Wipf and Stock). LESS ... MORE

Pulwama happens. There is rage in the PM’s heart. The opposition unites behind him. Blogs and newspaper articles demand action. Navjot Singh Sidhu smokes the peace pipe. Capt. Amarinder Singh is angry but cannot fire Sidhu. For Sidhu is a close friend of Priyanka Gandhi and supports her on Robert Vadra.

There is much hand-wringing all over the nation. The air force holds a mega show in the deserts of Rajasthan attended by Group Captain Sachin Tendulkar. Why isn’t some of this spectacular firepower used across the border? India cuts off a one-sided MFN treaty with Pakistan. It levies a 200% cess on what are negligible imports from Pakistan.

It compiles a dossier to declare Jaish-e-Mohammed chief Masood Azhar, the same man that India had released in 1999 after the Kandahar plane hijacking, as an international terrorist. But Hafiz Saeed, his brother-in-arms, there at the Lashkar-e-Toiba, has a $10 million dollar bounty on his head and still walks around with his head held high.

$10 million! I mean, Bin Laden had a bounty of $25 million on his head, which according to noted American journalist Seymour Hersh played a key role in his capture and killing. Nobody has contradicted Hersh’s account. A lot of people in South Asia would do a lot for $10 million. Yet Saeed roams around proud and free all over Pakistan. And don’t forget it’s the US that has put the bounty on Saeed; le pauvre (poor) India cannot rustle up even a few million dollars.

When will we stop expecting the US to fight our dirty wars for us? Now we are running again to them for succor. But the US is running to Pakistan for succor against the Taliban. Is it going to protect us when its interests are in direct contradiction to ours?

The nation’s anger is palpable. The country hasn’t seen such trauma since 26/11. But what happened then? Manmohan Singh signed the Sharm El Sheikh declaration with then-Pakistani PM Gillani barely six months later. It truly was a statement of sharam.

Iran is a country much smaller than India with a population of only 80 million. Today the US, Israel, Saudi Arabia, and other Gulf Sunni states are baying for Iran’s blood. That Iran supports terrorism is baloney. Iran supports the Palestinian Hamas which is fighting for its rights on its land, Palestine, as well as Hezbollah, which is fighting for its rights in its land, Lebanon.

Hamas and Hezbollah are opposed to Israel, so Israel is an inveterate hater of Iran. The US is allied with Israel. The Gulf Sunni states abhor Iran because Iran is Shia and they are Sunni. Just on the day of Pulwama, terrorists based in Pakistan killed 27 of Iran’s vaunted revolutionary guards. This was a day before Saudi Crown Prince Mohammad bin Salman was due to land in Islamabad.

Pakistan will pay a heavy price, asserts Iran. Do not doubt Iran’s words. Do not doubt the words and will of a nation that some of the most powerful countries are ranged against and which still doesn’t buckle at the knees. India is 15 times Iran’s size. Can we believe in the words of our leaders?

Pakistan is a country on the brink. It is at odds with all three of its neighbours, India, Iran, and Afghanistan. Afghanistan too blames Pakistan for heinous terror attacks like Pulwama. Pakistan’s economy is bankrupt. It is dependent upon handouts from countries like Saudi Arabia. But all this new money will go to fill the coffers of its generals and for buying toys for its military boys.

One can literally feel the anger in India. But this anger will fade. Pakistan equates Kashmir with Bangladesh. But this is a false equivalency. In then-East Pakistan, then-West Pakistan had launched a genocide against their fellow co-religionists in part because the East Pakistanis were squat and dark. Millions of refugees poured into India, after which India interceded.

In Kashmir, India is fighting for its secularist ideals, that minorities can live in peace in a Hindu-majority country. If Kashmir goes, that whole theory falls apart. India has made mistakes in Kashmir, but without Pakistan’s unbridled aiding and abetting of the insurgency, there really wouldn’t be any insurgency.

Indira Gandhi took action in 1971. Atal Behari Vajpayee took action after Kargil, and then in 2001, when he launched Operation Parakram, whose rollout, howsoever lumbering, brought Pakistan to its knees. What action Manmohan Singh took overtly after 26/11 is a mystery to one and all. What overt action the Modi government took after numerous terror attacks emanating or inspired by Pakistan is once again a mystery.

Election season is upon us. The anger over Pulwama will fade. But it cannot be allowed to fade. If Mr. Modi keeps indulging in dossier gathering and representations to world powers, then he does not have my vote. But if he takes clear, calculated and fearless action against our renegade western neighbour, then he has my vote. We cannot, we must not allow this renegade country, this loose cannon of what calls itself a nation to tear us apart. Whose only aim is to tear us apart.

Facebook Twitter Linkedin Email Disclaimer Views expressed above are the author's own.
