For Sena, Somaiya still persona non grata

Sena-BJP

Kirit Somaiya

Uddhav Thackeray

BMC

National Stock Exchange Limited scam

COULD A SWAP WORK?

Party leaders warn BJP against giving the Sena’s shrillest critic a ticket from Mumbai North East.Thebrass may have hugged and made up, but the parties’ functionaries are in no mood to forgive and forget.Sena leaders from Mumbai North East don’t want, one of the most vocal critics of their party and the BJP’s MP from the constituency, to be given a ticket for the upcoming elections. “Else, we will not have an alliance for this seat. He is the Sena’s enemy and we will not work for him at all,” a section of Sena functionaries from the region reportedly told their party presidentlast week.They warned that if Somaiya or any member of his family fights the elections, they would work towards defeating them.Somaiya has frequently led the charge against Sena, levelling even allegations of corruption against it. In 2016, before theelections, he claimed that he would expose the “mafia” in the Sena-led BMC and also take on their “godfather”. Somaiya had said that the BMC was in “the grip of a powerful mafia” controlled by “a saheb from Bandra and his PA” and that there was widespread corruption in it. The BJP MP did not identify the persons he was referring to but his comment was seen as a veiled criticism of the Sena.Somaiya had also asked Uddhav to make public his family assets and income.Days later, the Sena hit back, alleging that Somaiya had links with theand that he had pressured the prime minister’s office to stop an inquiry against him.Sena leaders have also put up a stiff opposition to state BJP president and MP Raosaheb Danve contesting from the Jalna Lok Sabha seat again. On Tuesday, Arjun Khotkar, minister of state for animal husbandry, dairy development and fisheries and MLA from Jalna, reiterated his stand that he will contest the parliamentary election against Danve, regardless of how the seat sharing agreement between the Sena and the BJP pans out.Khotkar has the backing of at least one senior Sena leader. Dhananjay Munde, leader of the opposition in the legislative council, has endorsed his candidature for the Jalna seat.Khotkar and Danve have often locked horns over control over local power centres, such as the zilla parishad, the municipal council, the agriculture market produce committee (APMV) and the district cooperative bank. While the local zilla parishad and the municipal council is controlled by Danve, the APMC lies with Khotkar. In December, Khotkar had organised a state-level wrestling competition and invited all bigwigs from Marathwada region, except Danve and his son who is an MLA from the Ghansangvi constituency in the same district.-------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------Given the open opposition by Sena leaders to Somaiya’s candidature, the BJP has put forwarded a proposal of swapping the South Mumbai and Mumbai North East seats. The BJP claims that since south Mumbai has a large population of Gujarati, Marwari and Jain communities who are its traditional supporters, the party’s candidate can score an easy win from there. However, the Shiv Sena has ruled out any such deal. “There will be no swapping of seats. We will strictly go by the 2014 formula and fi ght the same seats we fought in 2014,” said a senior Sena functionary.
