India decides to stop flow of river water to Pakistan

NEW DELHI (Dunya News) – After threatening to isolate Pakistan on international level, India is now determined to stop the flow of water into the country.

Indian Minister for Water Resources has confirmed the warning.

In a tweet, Nitin Gadkari said that the government under the leadership of Narendra Modi has decided to stop the water flow to Pakistan. He maintained that India will divert water from Eastern Rivers and supply it to Jammu and Kashmir and Punjab.

Under the leadership of Hon ble PM Sri @narendramodi ji, Our Govt. has decided to stop our share of water which used to flow to Pakistan. We will divert water from Eastern rivers and supply it to our people in Jammu and Kashmir and Punjab. — Nitin Gadkari (@nitin_gadkari) February 21, 2019

The minister told that the construction of dam has started at Shahpur- Kandi on Ravi River.

He asserted that water from the three rivers (Ravi, Beas and Sutlej) will be diverted towards occupied Kashmir.

The construction of dam has started at Shahpur- Kandi on Ravi river. Moreover, UJH project will store our share of water for use in J&K and the balance water will flow from 2nd Ravi-BEAS Link to provide water to other basin states. — Nitin Gadkari (@nitin_gadkari) February 21, 2019

He declared all the projects as ‘National Projects’.

The Indian PM has many times threatened to use water as weapon against Pakistan in the past.

Addressing the nation on the state media on Tuesday, Prime Minister Imran Khan had categorically declared that Pakistan will retaliate with full force in case of any aggression by India over the Pulwama incident.

“Pakistan will not think of retaliation, we will retaliate,” the Prime Minister warned India.

He said the Indian leadership must realize that it is easy to trigger a war but it would certainly be not in any one’s control to end it as per his desire. He said they should also note that where such a provocation will take the two countries and the region.

The Prime Minister however hoped that better sense will prevail in India and they will come to the negotiating table to sort out the matter through dialogue.

Imran Khan questioned as to what law of the world grants a right to any person or country to act as a judge, jury and executioner in any such incident. He also took serious exception of the ongoing rhetoric among the Indian leadership and society stressing for a military strike against Pakistan.

Imran Khan regretted that the Indian government started Pakistan bashing soon after the Pulwama incident without any investigation. He said as to how Pakistan can even think of engaging itself in any such unwarranted situation, when it was hosting Crown Prince of Saudi Arabia Muhammad Bin Salman in Islamabad.

The Prime Minister said we will do it not under any pressure but with a conviction that we will neither allow anyone to use our land for terrorism nor allow anyone to commit terrorism against us.
