Congress slams Modi apathy after Pulwama attack

New Delhi: In a scathing attack on ruling Bharatiya Janata Party (BJP) in the wake of last week’s Pulwama attack that killed more than 40 soldiers, Congress on Thursday accused Prime Minister Narendra Modi of shooting a documentary on the day of the attack and continuing filming even after news of the terror strike broke.

“The terror attack happened at 3:10pm, but the prime minister was busy shooting for his promotional film till 6.40pm. When the whole country was mourning the loss of lives of our soldiers in the Pulwama attack in the afternoon, Prime Minister Modi was busy shooting for a film till the evening. Is there any PM in the world like this,” Congress leader Randeep Surjewala said at a press conference.

On February 14, Modi was shooting for a documentary for Discovery channel on his days in the Himalayas.

“PM Modi, along with the head of Discovery and its camera crew, was watching crocodiles during his boat ride. He had tea and ‘samosa’ at 7pm at a government guesthouse while the nation did not eat. It is absolutely despicable and shameful,” Surjewala alleged.

He said that while the country was picking up the remains of our soldiers, Modi was busy with his “propaganda and publicity”.

“In his hunger for power, the prime minister has forgotten ‘raj dharma’ [duty of governance],” the Congress spokesperson said.

He also flayed Modi for arriving an hour late when coffins of Central Reserve Police Force (CRPF) soldiers reached the Delhi airport.

Earlier, Congress president Rahul Gandhi had said that his party would support the BJP government and not get into any other discussion for the next few days.

“I will support the government and jawans in this difficult time,” Gandhi had said.

On Thursday, Surjewala said that Congress had exercised restraint in the wake of the terror strike but it was important to “discuss conduct of the PM that insulted martyrs.”

“The Congress party and the entire nation stands united with our armed forces as also our government in every step that they take in tackling Pakistan-sponsored terrorism. We are determined in that resolve even today,” he said.

Reacting to Congress’s criticism of Modi, BJP president Amit Shah said Congress was playing dirty politics over the Pulwama attack.

“The Congress is making an issue of the events the PM was attending at that time. Say whatever you want, but the people of the country are not affected. He is very serious about national security and has zero tolerance towards terrorism. With what face are you questioning the PM? The same party questioned the surgical strikes,” Shah said at a rally in Andhra Pradesh.

Union Minister Ravi Shankar Prasad advised Congress to avoid politics over terror attacks against the country.
