J&K: Security withdrawal of Hurriyat & regional leaders triggers war of words

NEW DELHI: The Jammu and Kashmir administration under Governor Satya Pal Malik on Wednesday withdrew the security of 18 Hurriyat leaders and some 150 other political leaders in the Valley.This comes days after the Pulwama attack in which 40 CRPF personnel were killed. The process of withdrawal of security began this Sunday when the state administration had taken away the security of four separatist leaders, including Mirwaiz Umar Farooq The move has evoked mixed response in the Valley. While the regional mainstream parties have called the move "regressive", the BJP called it a step towards "nailing anti-national elements" in the state.NC chief Omar Abdullah termed the step "retrograde", noting that it will weaken the political activity in the state. "Withdrawal of security to mainstream political workers & office bearers is a retrograde step that will only weaken political activity in the valley," he said. Urging the governor to reconsider his administration's decision, the former chief minister said they will approach the court if it is not revisited.Besides the Hurriyat leaders, the list mainly comprises leaders from the People's Democratic Party (PDP), an ally of the BJP in the state government till June last year. This includes Shah Faesal , the 2010 IAS topper who quit bureaucracy to join politics, PDP leader Waheed Parra and Salman Reshi, the officials said.Speaking with TOI, Parra, who is also the youth president of the PDP, said that security has been withdrawn from them to curtail the political process in Kashmir. Blaming the governor-led government in the state, he said, "They want to make our lives vulnerable. We've seen a lot of instances where politicians have been killed and lives have been endangered.""Withdrawal is aimed to threaten us or have us killed. It won’t stop us from doing politics or speaking for people," the PDP leader said.Top officials in the police said that they are just implementing the orders. "We are just following orders. We don't know all the people whose security has been withdrawn and when we have the orders in front of us, we will be able to comment on it," they said.Bureaucrat-turned-politician Shah Faesal did not attach much importance to the move, saying he is not "dependent" on security. "I did not leave the government job thinking of my security. I am an ordinary man. But the government should know that it is pushing all the wrong buttons." He added that he had never asked for security.While the government claimed that it has withdrawn security of 18 Hurriyat leaders in the fresh order, JKLF leader and separatist Yasin Malik said: “This is utter dishonesty on the part of the government.” "I have been contacted half-a-dozen times by the security agencies urging me to take security which I have always declined. In my 35 years of public life, I have never enjoyed any state security."Home minister Rajnath Singh, during his visit to Srinagar on last Friday, had said security given to people getting funds from Pakistan and its snooping agency ISI should be reviewed.BJP chief spokesperson in J&K, Altaf Thakur "welcomed" the government's move but said it is not enough. Talking about Hurriyat leaders, he said that while enjoying all the facilities, they talk against India. On the removal of security to PDP leaders, he said, "PDP is a bigger threat. They are in the mainstream but support terrorists in Kashmir. The step should have been taken earlier but better late than never.""PDP's love for terrorists and Pakistan is for all to see. They play the politics of soft-separatism and gain their votes through that," he added.Meanwhile, confusion prevails over the names in the list of the government order. The names included that of separatist Syed Ali Shah Geelani and JKLF chief Yasin Malik, who had maintained that they never had any security, Shahid-ul-Islam and Nayeem Khan, who have been in jail for over a year now.While Geelani has been under house arrest for almost six years, Khan, Shah and Islam have been in Tihar jail for over a year now for different cases.Meanwhile, Peoples Conference president Sajad Lone has also urged the government to "review" it decision. However, taking to Twitter , he said, "The space to reduce security is that provided to ex CMs. SSG is an elitist white elephant and needs to go. It has no place in today’s world."On Wednesday, a security review meeting, which was held under the chairmanship of state chief secretary BVR Subrahmanyam, took the decision as it was felt that providing security to these separatist leaders is a "wastage" of scarce state resources which could be better utilised elsewhere, an official spokesperson said.Through this, over 1,000 police personnel and over 100 vehicles are freed to do regular police work, they said.Forty CRPF personnel were killed and five injured on February 14 in one of the deadliest terror strikes in Jammu and Kashmir when a Jaish-e-Mohammad suicide bomber blew up an explosive-laden vehicle near their bus in Pulwama district.
