‘Mahila Police Volunteers’ to check crimes against women

To be inducted in Chennai, Salem on a pilot basis

The State police will soon induct ‘Mahila Police Volunteers’ (MPVs) who will serve as a public-police interface in order to specifically fight crimes against women. The scheme will be implemented on a pilot basis in Chennai and Salem. These cities were chosen on the basis of the child sex ratio and crimes against women.

The Additional Director General of Police Amaraesh Pujari said that the scheme was initiated to curtail gender-based violence by providing specific training, increasing the presence of female personnel within the police force and community outreach to integrate gender issues into policy protocols and operational procedures.

‘Mahila Police Volunteers’ are envisaged as empowered, responsible, socially aware women for fostering leadership in local settings to facilitate policy outreach on gender concerns.

The broad mandate of MPVs is to report incidences of violence such as domestic violence, child marriage, dowry harassment, violence faced by women in public spaces. The volunteers will act as a role model for the community.

A friendly interface

Mr. Pujari said, “The objective of this novel scheme is to bring a friendly interface between victims of crimes and the police. These volunteers will greatly facilitate outreach activities of the police on gender concerns.”

The volunteers will create awareness on the existing services available for women and children for example, one-stop centres (OSC), short stay homes, shelters, police helpline 100, women’s helpline 181, Childline 1098, mobile application for emergency.

The volunteers will also act as an additional intelligence collection unit.

The MPVs will conduct one-to-one meetings, home visits, community meetings, focus group discussions to build confidence among women, families and peer groups to approach the local police, women helpline, one-stop centre in times of need.

The initiative will be funded out of the Nirbhaya Fund that accrues to the state. A training module will be prepared by Bureau of Police Research and Development.
