Provide 27% reservation to OBCs, clear backlog: Confederation - Jammu Kashmir Latest News

Excelsior Correspondent

JAMMU, Feb 21: Due to continuous struggle of the All India Confederation of SC/ST/OBC Organisations , Union Cabinet has cleared reservation in promotion’s in the J&K State.

Although, it took more than 3 years and a lot of distress was faced by the employees, Confederation will react after going through the documents to check whether all amendments included in it are retrospective or not. Confederation appealed the State and Centre Governments to revisit the Reservation in Recruitment by enhancing Reservation for OBC which is presently at 2% and first fulfil to implement in toto the Mandal Commission Report from 2% to 27% and also enhance quota of SC & STs.

However, the Confederation has condemned the transfer order issued by Government and alleged that lot of favouritism and discrimination has been done on religion and caste basis.

RK Kalsotra, president, Confederation accompanied by Ch Mohd Shafi, Sham Lal Basson, Azam Meelu, Lakshman Bhagat,Tilak Raj, Des Raj told the media-persons that the organisation had already repeatedly apprised the Govt about the claim of reserved categories for at least eight districts out of 22 for posting of SC/ST /OBC officers as DC’s and SSP’s but the demand has been ignored. He said that the competent officers from community are available and eligible while their merit is being ignored to accommodate others on religion and caste basis. Kalsotra further said that voice of Dalits and downtrodden is being crushed in present set up. There is none to represent the community in SAC and as a result the Governments is being briefed by such men who are against the well being of Dalit communities.

Kalsotra has appealed to the Governor to look into the issue and see how reserved categories have been ignored. He has warned that in case of any further discrimination the community will be compelled to educate the masses in every Constitutency to teach a lesson to the present set up in coming elections in an appropriate manner. He apprised the media that Confederation has already given the call of rally at Srinagar on Feb 24 and March 10 Maharally at Jammu for their demands.

Kalsotra further appealed to the Governor to launch special recruitment drive to clear backlog of reserved categories.
