Morning Digest: UN Security Council condemns Pulwama attack, stage set for brief Telangana Assembly session, and more

A select list of stories to read before you start your day

The United Nations Security Council (UNSC) issued a statement, which The Hindu had early access to, condemning the Pulwama attack and underlining the need to hold those responsible accountable. Significantly Jaish-e-Mohammed (JeM) has been named on the statement as having taken responsibility for the attack.

Pakistan’s counsel Khawar Qureshi and Attorney-General Anwar Mansoor Khan concluded the Kulbhushan Jadhav hearings at the International Court of Justice (ICJ) on Thursday, by calling for India’s claim for relief to be dismissed or declared inadmissible, on the basis of the appeal options being available to him in Pakistan. The two cited an FIR that had been filed at a civilian court in Pakistan.

Hindustan Aeronautics Ltd on Thursday said its production quality and capability is on a par with any other comparable aerospace OEM (original equipment manufacturer). HAL CMD R. Madhavan told a news conference during Aero India 2019, “Our job is to manufacture aircraft. Yes, we do feel bad whenever people speak ill of the company. But we try to take it in our stride.”

A sleeker, more lethal version of the supersonic cruise missile BrahMos is under development and the prototype should be ready for testing in about three years, said Dr. Sudhir K. Mishra, CEO and MD of BrahMos Aerospace.

Former Northern Army commander, Lieutenant General (Retd) D.S. Hooda, considered the chief architect of the 2016 surgical strikes in Pakistan Occupied Kashmir, will head the Congress’ task force on national security. The party issued a statement and released photographs of Lt. Gen. Hooda’s meeting with party president Rahul Gandhi.

The Supreme Court has ruled in favour of Saridon, a heritage brand from the healthcare product portfolio of Piramal Enterprises Ltd. (PEL), exempting its formulation from the list of banned FDCs (fixed dose combinations).

India will not allow its share of water from the Indus network of rivers to flow into Pakistan, Minister for Road Transport and Water Resources Nitin Gadkari said. Mr. Gadkari reiterated India’s position that has been under consideration, saying the water from the “eastern rivers” that fell in the Indian share would be diverted to Punjab and Jammu and Kashmir.

The stage is set for the commencement of the budget session of the State Legislature from Friday. The brief session, with three working days, will start with the presentation of the budget on Friday and it will be followed by discussion on the budget proposals and estimates on Saturday. The Appropriation Bill will be tabled and passed on Monday after which the Assembly would be adjourned sine die.

Reiterating the need for physical activity to reduce the incidence of non-communicable diseases (NCD), the World Health Organisation (WHO) has prescribed 150 minutes of weekly physical activity. It stated that physical inactivity is now identified as the fourth leading risk factor for global mortality.

The 2019 general election is being seen as a test of the parties opposed to the Bharatiya Janata Party (BJP)-led National Democratic Alliance in forging workable pre-election fronts, and of the BJP in deepening its electoral coalitions. But it is interesting to scan the changing political landscape before the campaign for the Lok Sabha gets truly underway for changes in the ‘politics of othering’ that has so far defined most Indian parties. Or in other words, are non-BJP, non-Congress parties adopting Congressism?
