Police need help identifying suspect in phone store robbery in Federal Way

Federal Way police are asking for the public’s help to identify the male in this photo that was taken from video footage of a robbery the evening of Feb. 15 at the Metro mobile phone store in Federal Way. Photo courtesy of the Federal Way Police Department

Following is a sample from the Federal Way police log:

Feb. 18

Car thieves nabbed: At 1:45 a.m. at Pacific Highway South and South 320th St., police confirmed a stolen vehicle in the area. They conducted a pit maneuver that brought the car to a stop. Two males were arrested.

Feb. 17

Traffic accident: At 11:42 p.m. at 1000 SW Campus Drive, a vehicle was involved in an alleged hit and run. The female passenger was transported to St. Francis Hospital. The alleged driver, the woman’s husband, went with her to the hospital. The vehicle struck the light pole and police notified Puget Sound Energy. The vehicle was impounded due to it blocking a sidewalk.

Threats to share lewd video: At 1:30 p.m. in the 4000 block of S. 333rd Place, the victim was friended on Facebook by someone calling themselves “Shelby Nicolson.” Nicolson hacked the victim’s phone and obtained a lewd video of the victim and threatened to post the video to the contacts listed in the victim’s cell phone. Police did not have suspect information at the time of the report.

Weapons offense: At 2:53 p.m. in the 34000 block 1st Way S., a male called 911 to report that a suspect pointed a pistol at him. Police determined that the males knew each other and were disputing over theft allegations. The reporting party had approached the suspect with a knife in his hand and the suspect pointed a pistol at him. The suspect with the pistol was determined to be a felon and was arrested for violation of the Uniform Firearm Act.

DUI: At 8:29 p.m. at 3601 SW 336th St., police were dispatched to a two-vehicle collision. An investigation determined that the at-fault driver was under the influence and intoxicated. He was booked into jail on DUI charges.

Feb. 16

Domestic dispute: At 10:32 p.m. in the 30200 block of 4th Ave. S., officers responded to the report of a physical domestic dispute. When they arrived, the female half reported that the male spit and slapped her face. She said there was no pain and there was no evidence of an assault. The male half who also called police said the female had slapped his face and put her hand on his neck. He said there was no pain and he was not strangled. He told officers he went to jail the last time and now it was her turn. Police could not establish who the primary aggressor was.

Assault with a firearm: At 3:34 p.m. at 1900 S. 314th St., officers responded to a fight with a gun at Walmart. Officers located three Walmart associates (victims) who advised that the suspects had fled on foot and that they had apprehended the firearm. Police later discovered that the pistol used in the assault was a confirmed stolen pistol out of King County. All four suspects were located and taken into custody. Two female suspects were booked on fourth-degree assault and both male suspects, one juvenile and one adult, were booked on multiple felonies.

Life-threatening injuries: At 3:44 p.m. at 30550 Military Road S., police were dispatched to a two-car collision. Life-threatening injuries occurred that resulted in the Major Accident Team handling the investigation. The head-on collision was blocking both lanes, with one vehicle leaving the roadway over a guardrail. Fire personnel attempted to remove the occupants of a van — three adults and a 4-year-old — using jaws of life cutting tools to partially dismantle the vehicle. The front of the vehicle that had struck the guardrail was crushed. Police saw two liquor bottles resting on the back seat of that car. Fire personnel were treating a man who had been removed from the vehicle, who claimed to have a young child in the back of the car with him. Fire officials found only an empty child seat in the back of the vehicle and conducted an extensive search of the nearby wooded area, but were unable to locate any child. It was later determined that the man’s child was safe with another family member and there had been no child in his car during the collision. He had multiple broken ribs and a serious chest injury, and was transported to Harvorview Medical Center with life-threatening injuries. Medics told police the man didn’t appear to be intoxicated. A witness said it appeared the man was driving at a high rate of speed.

Threat with a firearm: At 2:47 p.m. at 1928 S. Commons, the victim was threatened by an unknown male with a firearm. The suspect fled the scene and was not located. There were no injuries.

Business robbery: At 2:42 p.m. at 2152 SW 336th St., police responded to an armed robbery in progress at the Metro PCS store. The 911 operator received a call from a store employee via FaceTime that there was an armed suspect in the store, possibly a light-skinned black male, 5 feet 6 inches, thin build wearing a gray hoodie with his face concealed by something black. The suspect demanded money and all of the new Iphones. An employee later relayed to police that the suspect asked both employees, “Do you want to die?” Police arrived within about 30 seconds of the time of the call. The officer did not see anyone fitting the description running from the store. Police staged on scene and noticed extremely heavy foot and vehicle traffic in the parking lot, making it unsuitable for a K9 track. Two employees said the suspect had left on foot, westbound through the parking lot. One of the employees said she believed this was the same suspect who had struck their store the day before. Police determined by reviewing video that the suspect was not wearing gloves during the most recent robbery and touched several things. The scene was processed for fingerprints. Police also determined that the suspect in the robbery on Feb. 16 appeared different than the suspect from the robbery on Feb. 15. Police are asking for the public’s help in identifying the man in the video from the Feb. 15 robbery. Anyone with information is urged to contact the police department at 253-835-2121.

Feb. 15

Drunk male attempts to open front door: At 6:28 p.m. in the 5300 block of SW Dash Point Road, a “very intoxicated” male began to knock and attempted to open the front door of a female’s residence. Not knowing the male, the female homeowner armed herself and waited for police to arrive. The male had no idea where he was or what was going on. The male was detained without incident at the front porch. The male’s wife and brother attempted to contact him via phone after detention and officers spoke with them. Police determined that no crime was committed but the male did have the wallet of an unknown party in his possession. No other surrounding agencies reported any incidents with the names involved. The male was dropped off at his residence with his wife in Tacoma.

Feb. 14

Stolen vehicle: At 6:45 a.m. at 30004 5th Ave. SW, a resident called about a suspicious vehicle parked near their house. It turned out to be a stolen vehicle. Police deployed spikes and were successful. A short pursuit ensued. Police arrested the suspect for eluding police and other offenses.

Involuntary committal: At 8:13 a.m. in the 30000 block of Military Road S., a wife became aggressive towards her husband and started yelling at him. She told him she wanted to die and wanted to take her children with her. She grabbed her two young children by their legs and pulled them off their beds. Her husband stopped her. She exited the house naked. Durign police contact the woman yelled, stating she wanted to die. She was involuntarily committed.

Burglary, forced entry: At 9:38 a.m. at East India Grill, someone forced entry into the business and burglarized it.

Feb. 13

Transient given bus pass: At 10 a.m. at 2141 S. 314th St., the city’s Parks Department staff contacted police and requested a walk-through of the old Target building after they found a door open on the west side of the building. Officers checked the interior and found no one inside. They found a transient person camping on the west exterior portion of the building, along with a large pile of junk and trash. The transient was angry and confrontational. In a calm voice, officers offered the transient an ORCA bus pass so she could seek shelter and services. The woman accepted, however, she was still unfriendly and rude to to officers and park staff.






