Jeremy Hunt faces backlash by British MP’s over his tweets on Pulwama attack

The quote by UK Foreign Secretary Jeremy Hunt where he states India-administered Kashmir was the matter of concern.

A number of British MPs condemned the terror strike in Pulwama on Social Media

The Pulwama attack in Kashmir where 44 CRPF Jawans lost their lives is being condemned internationally. Last week, the UK Government called attack senseless and brutal act.

There was outpouring support to India by the UK government.

UK Foreign Secretary Jeremy Hunt tweeted “Shocked by today’s senseless and brutal act of terror in India-administered Kashmir. I offer my sincere condolences to the victims’ families. We stand with India,

Shocked by today’s senseless and brutal act of terror in India-administered Kashmir. I offer my sincere condolences to the victims’ families. We stand with India. — Jeremy Hunt (@Jeremy_Hunt) February 14, 2019



There were other British MPs too who condemned the terror strike on Social Media.

MP Tom Tugendhat too tweeted that I’m deeply saddened by the terrorist attack in Kashmir. Thoughts are with the Indian security personnel killed and injured by this appalling crime

I’m deeply saddened by the terrorist attack in Kashmir. Thoughts are with the Indian security personnel killed and injured by this appalling crime. — Tom Tugendhat (@TomTugendhat) February 14, 2019

Bob Blackman also condemned the attack on security forces in India and tweeted “Pulwama attack: India will ‘completely isolate’ Pakistan. We stand with India. Time to isolate & proscribe the terrorists responsible for this atrocity,”

Pulwama attack: India will ‘completely isolate’ Pakistan. We stand with India. Time to isolate & proscribe the terrorists responsible for this atrocity. https://t.co/RpGNSgZOvu — Bob Blackman (@BobBlackman) February 15, 2019



There were various tweets in support of India, which ensured the support from the UK to India. However, the quote by UK Foreign Secretary Jeremy Hunt where he states India-administered Kashmir was the matter of concern.

This issue was first addressed by Mr Virendra Sharma an Indian-origin Opposition Labour Party MP on 15th Feb, where he cleared the fact that Kashmir is an integral part of India since 1947 and the phrase “India administered Kashmir” is offensive to many of them in India and he also requested that the similar connotation should be avoided in the future.

His letter attached for reference:

Also, Mr Bob Blackman MP on 18th Feb wrote a letter to Foreign Secretary, pointing out that his post had a problematic part which needs to be addressed. This statement “India administered Kashmir” is factually incorrect, Kashmir had decided to be a part of India and ever since 1947 it is an integral part of India. He also pointed out that the language can be offensive to many in India and hence he should retract this phrase.

In his letter, he also enquired about the help the UK will be providing to India for their fight against terrorism.

Letter attached for reference:
