Pakistan Army warns India of surprise response if war imposed

RAWALPINDI: Major General Asif Ghafoor, Director General of the Inter-Services Public Relations (ISPR), on Friday said Pakistan was capable of giving a response which would surprise India if any war is imposed .



Speaking to the media to discuss the situation that has emerged after Pulwama attack, the military spokesman said India blamed Pakistan after a man in Occupied Kashmir killed Indian soldiers in Pulwama.



He said Pakistan took sometime to respond and the prime minister issued his statement after seeing shortsightedness of India.

Major Gen Asif Ghafoor shed light on the past events that led to war between the two countries.

He said Pakistan creation in 1947 was a reality that India has not accepted so far.

The ISPR DG said Pakistan had nothing to gain from Pulwama attack.

He said Indian government should seek explanation from its security forces before blaming cross border elements for attacks in Occupied Kashmir or on its own territory .

He said how can such elements cross the border in the presence of strict security arrangements on the Line Of Control (LoC).

The ISPR chief said why would Pakistan want to stage a militant attack in Occupied Kashmir when eight important events were due in the month of February and March including Saudi Crown Prince visit, UNSC discussion on terrorism, Afghan political reconciliation process, EU meeting on Kashmir, Kulbhushan Jhadav hearing at the ICJ, key FATF meet in Paris, Kartarpur Border meeting between Indian and Pakistan and the PSL 2019.

He said the attacker was a resident of Occupied Kashmir and the brutality of Indian military compelled the suicide bomber to react violently.



"Pakistan is changing, we have suffered a lot in the war on terror. We helped international forces inside Afghanistan," Major General Asif Ghafoor said.



Talking about Indian threats, Ghafoor said: "You (India) shall not be able to surprise us.We will surprise you," the DG ISPR said while referring to reports that India was preparing for a war.

He said Pakistan invites India to hold dialogue to resolve issues including Kashmir .

"You are the biggest democracy, two democracies do not fight. You are a secular country. Why should such circumstances be created where minorities are not safe," he said.

Answering a question, he said "We are not preparing for war, but we have to be prepared to respond".



Iran

Asked about Iranian allegations, he said the western neighbor was brotherly, friendly country and Pakistan was also talking to Iran for border fencing so that no third party is able to exploit the situation.

Asad Durrani

He said Former former DG ISI Asad Durrani has been found guilty of violating military code conduct, a reference to former spymaster's book which he co-authored with ex-chief of India's RAW.



The ISPR DG also confirmed that two Military officers are under arrest for espionage and the Army Chief General Qamar Bajwa has ordered court partial against them.
