SC orders action to prevent attack on Kashmiri students

The Supreme Court on Friday ordered chief secretary and police heads of all states and Union Territories to take "prompt and necessary actions" to prevent attack, threat, intimidation, or social boycott of Kashmiris after the February 14 Pulwama attack which claimed lives of 49 security personnel.

A bench of Chief Justice Ranjan Gogoi and Justice Sanjiv Khanna issued notice to the states of Punjab, Maharashtra, Uttarakhand, Uttar Pradesh, Delhi and others on a petition filed by advocate Tariq Adeeb.

The court directed that the nodal officers appointed in terms of the apex court's judgement of July 14, 2018 with regard to mob lynching will act as nodal officer to prevent any act of violence against Kashmiris and Kashmiri students or other minorities.

"It would be given wide publicity in all states so that all acts of assault, threat, intimidation or social boycott can be brought into notice for actions. Advisory already issued be retreated from time to time," the bench said.

Attorney General K K Venugopal, appearing for the Centre, said, it is the human problem. The Union government has already taken steps. Nodal officers have already been appointed in all states, advisory has been issued on February 16. Telephone numbers have also been given.

It was done as Kashmiri students were vulnerable. Nodal officers were appointed after the February 14 incident of Pulwama attack.

He said the Intelligence secretary met him last evening, he said he was in touch with DGPs of all states.

Senior advocate Colin Gonsalves, appearing for the petitioner, submitted that over the last two days, two new incidents had happened in Punjab and Maharashtra.

"I seek an order as happened in mob lynching case," he said.

"What is the immediate order that you want," the bench asked him.

"I want a nodal officer, so that any aggrieved person can make a call," he responded.

The court issued notice to the Centre and as many as 11 states, seeking their response on the petition seeking steps to prevent any such incidents.

The court decided to hear the matter on Wednesday.

In his plea, the petitioner-advocate, Adeeb sought directions to the Centre and other state governments to "take steps to prevent threat, assaults, violent attack, social boycott, ostracism, eviction and other coercive acts by groups and mobs against Kashmiri and other minorities, particularly in the wake of terrorist attack of February 14."

He also sought a direction to head of educational institutions to take steps to protect life and dignity of Kashmiri and other minority students.

The petitioner said a nodal officer should be appointed in every state and each district to prevent any act of violence and prosecute those involved into it.

He said a website should be created to list the incidents and action taken on those matters. The petitioner said a helpline should also be created. Among other things, the petitioner cited Meghalaya governor Tathagat Roy's tweet asking for boycott of Kashmiri products.
