'NTR: Mahanayakudu' review: A product of political obligations

In the first installment of legendary Telugu actor and former CM of erstwhile Andhra Pradesh, N.T. Rama Rao’s biopic, the journey begins in 1947 and ends sometime in 1982 when NTR decides to start Telugu Desam Party (TDP). Covering 35 years, the movie tried to capture NTR’s rise to stardom and his eventual decision to enter public life. But the second part, NTR: Mahanayakudu, truncates his political life to just two years and the movie revolves around interesting episodes that took place between 1982 and 1984.

It is but natural that those who watched the movie would come out feeling that justice has not been served by the makers to the person who enjoyed a demi-god status. For almost a decade, from 1984 to 1994, politics in the Telugu state was very colourful, courtesy NTR. He was known to be impulsive and emotional with his decisions which resulted in a lot of drama and surprising events. However, to the reasons best known to the makers, the movie highlights just one of the many phases of NTR’s political life, when attempts were made to destabilise his government. How he got back on his feet despite odds is the takeaway from the movie.

The beginning is similar to the first part, as the movie starts with Basavatarakam (Vidya Balan), wife of NTR (Balakrishna), flipping through photographs of her husband and reminiscing his life events, as she undergoes treatment for cancer at a hospital in Chennai. The flashback takes the audience to the time when NTR gets busy laying foundation to his party. Assisted by Nadella Bhaskara Rao (Sachin Khedekar) and with help from his son-in-law Daggubati Venkateshwar Rao (Bharath Reddy). Though advised against it, NTR decides to go into the public, leaving the comforts of a superstar’s life, by travelling in a ‘Chaitanya Ratham’—an old van driven by his son Harikrishna (Kalyan Ram). The following scenes give an understanding of how NTR began the culture of mass contact campaign by touring the state and understanding the problems of the people.

During this yatra, he announces Rs 2 per kg rice to the poor and equal share for women in inherited property. The movie takes an interesting turn after India Gandhi is introduced. She decides to go for early elections to curtail the growing popularity of NTR as a political leader. Caught by surprise, NTR and his men quickly swing into election mode, finalise candidates and contest. On the results day, while everyone around is tense, NTR is busy playing with his grandchildren. These small details give an idea about how NTR was in real life.

What follows is TDP’s terrific victory in 1983 and NTR taking oath as chief minister in an open area, breaking away from the usual tradition of swearing-in inside the Raj Bhavan. NTR is shown as a committed leader and efficient administrator who is against corruption or misdoings of his own men.

Post interval, the plot revolves around how NTR is betrayed and overthrown by an opposite faction within the party supported by the Congress and how he tackles the crisis. Chandrababu Naidu (Rana Daggubati) is elevated as a sharp and brave strategist who helped NTR regain control of the party. He gets ample screentime and his character is the most significant in the movie after NTR. Rana's tranformation as Chandrababu Naidu is quite a revelation. From the body language to the way he is dressed, the effort that has been put is quite visible. In fact, every minute of the screentime, you are surprised by how the actor in him disappears and Rana effortlessly slips into the skin of the character.

The movie ends with the death of Basavatarakam. Director Krish has done a good job with emotional scenes, especially those between NTR and his wife. The one-upmanship between NTR and Nadella which spills on to the Delhi streets also keeps the audience glued. Not surprisingly, Balakrishna steals the show. Compared to the first part, Balakrishna as older NTR is more convincing and in some scenes it feels like the late actor has graced the screen.

The two-hour movie is fast-paced and interesting at times, but lacks honesty. NTR: Mahanayukudu is clearly a product of political obligations, keeping in mind the upcoming elections. A lot is left to be desired from the biopic which was touted as an ode to the pride of Telugu cinema and politics.

Film: NTR: Mahanayakudu

Language: Telugu

Director: Krish

Cast: Balakrishna, Vidya Balan, Rana Daggubati

Rating: 3/5
