Government’s weak response to attacks on Kashmiris is shameful

Jiby writes on politics, developmental issues & legal affairs and enjoys hunting for data to make his arguments. He works on the Edit Page at The Times of India

It happened during the spate of lynchings. It has happened again during the assault on Kashmiris by right-wing mobs. The Prime Minister is silent and in his absence the government doesn’t quite seem to know what to do. The Centre has reportedly asked all states to ensure the safety of Kashmiri students. But we know what such communication means in the absence of strong political messaging. Even the opposition and its leader Rahul Gandhi, who these days makes it a point to directly attack the Prime Minister, has been largely silent over the attacks.

So the Supreme Court has had to come into the picture and it has issued notice to Centre and 11 state governments to take strict action against those targeting Kashmiris. In the case of gau raksha lynchings , it was again the Supreme Court that had to intervene after police response to the mob violence in BJP-ruled states was shockingly inadequate. We can hope that the Supreme Court order will force states to act tough against those whose actions stop dangerously close to lynchings.

The government’s Janus-faced approach to the attacks on Kashmiris is evident from its response to Meghalaya governor Tathagatha Roy’s tweet calling for a boycott of all things Kashmiri. The man, despite taking an oath to adhere to the Constitution, makes a hateful statement in the guise of free speech that threatens the unity and integrity of India, and promotes enmity against a section of its people. Roy continues to keep his post.

Union minister Ravi Shankar Prasad has said the government does not agree with Roy’s views. Quite a relief that. But disagreement is a stupefying response, given the gravity of his offence. A strong message needs to be sent. Roy must be sacked and PM Modi must tell the foot soldiers and the troll army that the full force of the Indian Penal Code will come visiting them.

Before the country could recover from the dastardly attack in Pulwama that killed 40 of our CRPF jawans and even while we mourn their passing, we have been overtaken by a most shameful, most vile, outpouring of hatred and violence. The targeting of innocent Kashmiris for no fault of theirs by right-wingers played right into Pakistan’s strategy of dividing India. Yet none of these so-called “nationalists” could see the harm they were doing to the nation. Prime Minister Narendra Modi should have called for calm the moment the first incidents were reported.

Facebook Twitter Linkedin Email Disclaimer Views expressed above are the author's own.
