It can’t be left unanswered

Senior bilingual journalist for the last 40 years. Retired as Editor of Vir Pratap, the oldest Hindi daily of Punjab. He has contributed articles for The Tribune, The Dawn and Huffington Post and can be reached at chandermohan.net or @cmvohra LESS ... MORE

Yet another Pakistan prime minister has denied involvement in a terror attack on the Indian soil. Imran Khan wants “actionable evidence” about his country’s involvement in the Pulwama carnage. He has also warned of “retaliation”, there has not been a single word of condolence or condemnation. Immediately after the attack, Jaish-e- Mohammad took responsibility for the attack but the PM of ‘Naya Pakistan’ is in denial, an old habit across the border.

What happened to the “actionable evidence” that we supplied after the Mumbai attack of 26/11 and the Pathankot airbase attack? Even ‘Dawn’ of Karachi has editorially advised its government, “Islamabad should earnestly probe the involvement of banned JeM that has been linked to this and past attacks …”, and as far as “retaliation” is concerned, young Pakistani journalist Naila Inayat has reminded them in a tweet “history is witness of the results of that retaliation”.

Pakistan will not change. All our previous PMs have burnt their fingers trying to be friendly with our western neighbour, it is now the turn of the present Prime Minister. Their civilian government seems only the front office of the GHQ in Rawalpindi. Surprisingly, this attack comes when Pakistan is facing an acute financial crisis with mere $7 billion in reserve. Though Imran Khan had said that he would rather commit suicide then ask for an IMF bailout but that’s what they urgently need and that’s where they are going. They have less than two months import cover but after Pulwama, IMF bailout may be in jeopardy. Obviously, that country is again on a suicidal mission and in spite of Imran Khan driving him around Islamabad, the announcement of $20 billion by Saudi Crown Prince Mohammad Bin Salman will not materialise immediately. The pledge is for future investments, it’s not going to rescue Pakistan from the immediate crisis.

But ours is also the story of multiple failures. It’s not possible that a 19- year-old school dropout who joined the jehadis only 11 months ago could have collected 200 kg explosives, fit them in a car and then explode. This is the handiwork of experts. Who are they? Where did the explosives come from? What happened to our intelligence machinery? We have now wiped out the entire JeM leadership in Kashmir but the question arises why it is always after the event? Why were they not eliminated earlier? Why was the period between Pathankot-Uri not utilised properly?

Our politicians have milked Uri for all its worth even taking credit though it should have legitimately gone to the Army but as Pulwama tells us, it hasn’t changed anything.

The PDP-BJP coalition was a disaster. It achieved nothing and the situation in Kashmir is much worse now. It’s true that a large number of terrorists have been killed but our losses have also been extremely high. A friend has written, “Unfortunately operations are conducted by forces who suffer damages but retaliatory measures are decided by politicians whose able-bodied children are meant only to rule us.” After a respite of five days, our politicians are again at each other’s throats.

More and more Kashmiri boys are now joining militancy. Nor were we able to rehabilitate Kashmiri Pandits or the refugees living there. Maybe, it’s time to revisit the demographic profile of the Valley as suggested by Abhinav Kumar, an IPS officer serving in Kashmir. The downslide started not with the Amarnath row or the killing of Burhan Wani but with the exodus of Kashmiri Pandits in late 1989 and early 1990. We are facing the consequences.

Nor do we have a long-term Pakistan policy. We have tried everything from the bus ride to attending social functions there. We threatened them with war after the attack on our Parliament but backed down after a year. They are still following the policy of Zia- Ul- Haq of giving us a thousand cuts. Pakistan army feels they can take revenge for Bangladesh in Kashmir. Support of China and of Saudi Arabia whose crown prince our PM gave an unnecessary hug, has only emboldened them. The so- called Wuhan spirit has also not helped as China refuses to declare Masood Azhar a terrorist. China wants to help it’s “all weather friend”, as also to protect the CPEC but they must also understand that the public opinion here is turning against them.

And now Pulwama has happened. Pyres were lit in 40 of our small towns and villages. As Lt Gen (retd) D S Hooda, who planned the 2016 surgical strike has also said, this attack cannot be left unanswered. The country waits.

Facebook Twitter Linkedin Email Disclaimer Views expressed above are the author's own.
