FAKE NEWS! Election Commission writes to Delhi Police; voters told that they can vote online

The Election Commission asked the Delhi Police to register an FIR against the people who were spreading the news (Representative Image). | Photo Credit: Getty Images

New Delhi: Fake news has slowly become one of the biggest concerns in India. Recently, the news that voters who are not in the country can caste their vote online had been doing the rounds on WhatsApp. This led to a lot of confusion among the people which prompted a reaction from the Election Commission.

In an attempt to clear the air around the fake news, the Election Commission wrote to the Delhi Police. The Election Commission asked the Delhi Police to register an FIR against the people who were spreading the news.

Election Commission asks #Delhi police to register an F.I.R against the people spreading #FakeNews.@Iam_Ayushmann with the details. pic.twitter.com/OKSA4gD1mf — Mirror Now (@MirrorNow) February 22, 2019

Also Read: World Day of Social Justice: Why do we need more women as law-makers

The Election Commission wrote to the Delhi Police after a message stating that voters who were not in India could caste their votes online went viral. The fake news was being circulated through messages and to prevent any confusion, the EC wrote to the Delhi Police and also tweeted a clarification.

In their tweet, the election commission denied having any provision which would allow people to caste their votes online. This is the third instance where the EC has written to the Delhi Police. Earlier, the EC had written to the Delhi police after citizens received phone calls from people. In the second instance, there was another fake news doing the rounds on social media, which prompted the Election Commission to write to the Delhi Police.

Earlier this month, various people received phone calls from unknown numbers. The callers told the people that their names had been struck off from the voter list. In response to this, the Election Commission cautioned the people about the calls and assured them that there was nothing to worry about.
