Pakistan Army spokesman addresses press over Pulwama terror attack, gives wrong, misleading details

Islamabad [Pakistan], Feb 22 (ANI): Pakistan Army on Friday appeared to be dismissive of the initiatives taken by India in the aftermath of Pulwama attack, including withdrawing Most Favored Nation (MFN) status accorded to Islamabad.

Pakistan Army spokesperson Major General Asif Ghafoor, while addressing a press conference, maintained a belligerent stand and levelled various allegations against India, giving wrong and misleading details.

During the entire press meet, Gafoor remained in a denial mode about his country's involvement in the Pulwama terror attack even though Jaish-e-Mohammad (JeM) terror outfit, based in Pakistan, has claimed responsibility for it in a statement.

"How do you (India) want us to deal with the situation? Should we follow your (India's) approach? An attack took place and without proper investigation or even evidence, you levelled allegations and started talking of revenge. You withdrew MFN status, you denied visas (to shooting team), you have stopped selling tomatoes, you are resorting to war-mongering," said the Director General of Inter-Services Press Relations (ISPR).



India has asserted that since JeM, which is based in Pakistan, had itself claimed responsibility for the Pulwama attack, there was no more evidence required.

The UN, the US and several other major world powers too have named JeM as being responsible for the attack.

Gafoor spoke about major terror attacks that took place in India from 2001 and claimed, wrongly, that these happened around the time of Lok Sabha elections.

For instance, he claimed that terror attack on Parliament on December 13, 2001 took place ahead of "general elections in 2002". This was a complete lie as the Lok Sabha elections had taken place in 1999 and next were scheduled in 2004.



Similarly, he gave wrong and misleading details about other major attacks like 2008 Mumbai attack and 2016 attack on Air Base in Pathankot.

Talking about the possibility of a war between the two nations, Gafoor said Pakistan does not want an armed conflict but will respond with full force if attacked.

"There are talks in India that Pakistan is preparing for war. Pakistan is not preparing for war," the Army spokesman said.

"We do not wish to go to war but please be rest assured should you initiate any aggression- first you shall never be able to surprise us, let me assure you we shall surprise you...We have the ways and the means to attain what is desired. I hope you (India) get this message and don't mess with Pakistan," he added.

He also claimed that Pakistan was not being isolated internationally, even at a time when the entire international community is mounting pressure on the country to act against terror infrastructure existing in the country. (ANI)
