After Caravan article stamps 'caste' on martyr’s coffins, CRPF says ‘we identify ourselves as Indians’

Representational Image | Photo Credit: Facebook

New Delhi: The CRPF blasted the Caravan magazine for its article on 'Caste Census' and said everyone in the paramilitary force identifies themselves as Indians. Calling the article shameful, objectionable and divisive CRPF’s chief spokesperson Moses Dhinakaran said that this pathetic divisiveness of caste, colour, and religion doesn't exist in our blood.

“We in CRPF identify ourselves as Indians. Not more, not less. This You should strictly refrain from insulting all the martyrs. They are not statistics for your demeaning and meaningless write-up,” he tweeted.

We in CRPF identify ourself as Indians. Not more, not less. This pathetic divisiveness of caste, color, and religion doesn't exist in our blood. You should strictly refrain from insulting all the martyrs. They are not statistics for your demeaning and meaningless write-up. https://t.co/SOlRUwF878 — Moses dhinakaran (@dhinakaran1464) February 22, 2019

The monthly magazine had published an article in which caste-based profiling of the 40 jawans, who were martyred in dastardly Pulwama terrorist attack, was carried out.

Slamming the magazine for insulting the martyrs, Dhinakaran said that the magazine had reduced them to mere statistics for a meaningless write-up.

The article triggered widespread outrage and social media users criticised the magazine for publishing it in the first place.

In a surcharged atmosphere with a fervent desire for war, this is callous.

When a jawan sacrifices his life to secure yours, do you think he cares about your caste, creed, religion, etc? He fights for India & not for a hindu , muslim or sikh. Rise above this petty mindset. https://t.co/AI6rBlZIKn — Mehbooba Mufti (@MehboobaMufti) February 21, 2019

Condemning the article former Jammu & Kashmir CM Mehbooba Mufti tweeted that jawan fights for India and not for a Hindu, Muslim or Sikh and said that its time to rise above this petty mindset.

Meanwhile, Pakistan’s military warned India against "misadventure" and said that it was capable to tackle any threats. Pakistan’s DG ISPR Asif Ghafoor said that India should not mess with Pakistan and added that the Army is ready with a surprise if India attacks the country.

Tensions between the nuclear-armed neighbours escalated after Pakistan-based Islamist group Jaish-e-Mohammed (JeM) launched a suicide attack on CRPF killing 40 jawans.
