Day 5: Commuters hassled as farmers lay seize, HC cautions against disruption to life

Ludhiana: Commuters were hassled for the fifth consecutive day on Friday as agitating farmers disrupted, busy Ludhiana Ferozepur road near zonal branch of Punjab National Bank for over four hours on Friday. The farmers have been protesting against the banks for acting against them in cheque bounce cases pertaining to loans. Traffic on ever busy Ludhiana Ferozepur Road remained disturbed yet again as the various farmers association blocked the Ferozepur Road near zonal branch of Punjab National Bank for indefinite period on Friday afternoon. The farmers were protesting against the banks for acting against them in cheque bounce cases. The Bank authorities and farmers had been at loggerheads as latter have been demanding that the farmers with less than ten acres land who had a debt of Rs 10 lakh, should not be forced over the issue of repayment, on the other hand the government stressed on giving the waiver to only those who had five acres of land or less.

The farmers staged a protest sit in around 100 meters from the zonal Office, at around 1.30 pm and blocked the traffic on the route. This led to disruption of traffic on South city road and Southern byepass. They lifted the blockage at around 7 pm.

Surjeet Singh, a resident of BRS Nagar said that as the authorities put the traffic on the smaller roads inside the localities they too faced problems because of traffic chaos. Several commuters going towards Jagraon and Mullanpur Dakha were caught unawares and got struck in the traffic. Vivek Singla, a businessman of Dugri phase two, said that he along with his sister Shubhrika Bansal was coming from Dharamkote in Moga after attending last rites of his aunt when they got stuck in traffic jam near Octroi post on Ferozepur road at around 2.30 pm. He added that after about half an hour they had to turn back towards Gahaur and then to Ayali to South City and finally reached home with a delay of about an hour. There were several others who faced inconvenience due to blockade and diversions. Ravi Kumar, a trader of old city said that he had to go to Mullanpur for meeting with a client and as he reached Ferozpur road he got stuck in traffic jam. He added that he then took Pakhowal road route but in the process he got delayed by around forty five minutes and by the time the person with whom he had to meet had left so he suffered loss.

Ludhiana Police Commissioner, Dr Sukchain Gill admitted that the commuters did face problems because of farmers protest even as they had given diversions. He added at 7.30 pm that the farmers have lifted the blockade around 15 minutes ago.

Free to hold protest but don’t disrupt life- HC

Chandigarh

The Punjab and Haryana High Court made it clear that the farmers’ unions had the right to protest, but it was not absolute. The bench underlined that in the name of agitation, the Unions can not resort to activities which would disrupt the life of general publicby blocking roads etc. It was open for the district administration and police to initiate necessary steps for ensuring the agitation remained peaceful, the bench further observed.

The order by Justice Tejinder Singh Dhindsa came after the Punjab National Bank moved the Court seeking directions to the official respondents to restrain the farmers’ unions from holding agitation/dhama or related activity within a radius of 200 meters of the bank premises on Ferozepur Road in Ludhiana.

The Bench asserted that the pleadings on record indicated that a state level banking committee (SLBC) comprising nationalized and private banks was constituted; and the petitioner bank was heading it.

The Bench observed that the respondent farmers’ unions approached the petitioner-bank to instruct all other banks functioning in the State to extend loan facilities to the farmers without placing restriction on repayment of loans.

The Bench also took note of contention by the counsel representing the petitioner-bank that a decision in principle had already been taken not to take coercive steps against the farmers regarding the repayment of the loans and also to return cheques already taken from the marginal farmers with holding of less than 5 acres or pertaining to a loan liability of up to Rs 10 lakhs.

On Friday, Punjab National Bank, that heads the state level Banking committee (SLBC) consisting of Nationalised as well as private banks, had given undertaking in the court that apart from not taking coercive steps, they will and return the cheques taken from the marginal farmers having the land holding of less than 5 acres or pertaining to a loan of liability upon Rs.10 Lakhs.

Meanwhile responding to the development, farmers associations described the undertaking by the bank as their victory. Maintaining that their demand for including farmers upto a landholding of 10 acre however remained unresolved and the farmers would hold a meeting on Saturday to decide over the future course of action.

“We feel that it is our victory that they (PNB that heads SLBC) had to give undertaking in the court that they will not use coercive steps for agricultural loan payment from farmers. This is because of our pressure. By submitting an undertaking they have admitted that they have committed illegal act by carrying out criminal proceedings for agricultural loan recovery instead of using civil procedure,” said Jagmohan Singh, General Secretary of BKU Ekta Dakunda. He added that they hold a meeting of various farmers association on Saturday morning to decide future course of action.

The farmers associations hinted that they will intensify their struggle for fulfillment of all demands.

“Though the bank has given undertaking in the court that they will not harass farmers for loan recovery but our main issue remains unresolved. We will continue to struggle till they concede to our demand that they will not use coercive methods for recovery of loan of the farmers with ten acres land. At present they are saying it for farmers below five acres land,” said Sudagar Singh, Leader of BKU Ekta Ugrahan.

Box

Jagmohan Singh, general secretary, BKU Ekta Dakunda said, “There is civil procedure for agriculture loan recovery by banks, but they are getting cases lodged under Section 138 of Negotiable Instruments Act against farmers which is a criminal procedure and is illegal.

“Around 1,000 cheque bounce cases have been prepared by the authorities, whereas about 350 farmers of the state have already been issued arrest warrants in such cases whereas some have even been jailed. Banks have also taken blank cheques and in case they get bounced, the farmers are made to face legal action,” said Sudagar Singh, leader of Bhartiya Kissan Union (BKU) Ekta Ugrahan who belongs to Ghudani village in Payal.



Facebook Twitter Linkedin EMail
