Heat on cheating: 6 lakh skip UP board exams

ALLAHABAD: Over six lakh students have skipped the Class 10 and 12 examinations of the Uttar Pradesh Secondary Education Board ( UPSEB ), apparently because the “cheating mafia” has shied away owing to the “tough measures” against it by the education department. The high school and intermediate exams of the board started simultaneously on February 7 and will end on March 2.“There is also a decline of over 94% in the number of students who had registered from Nepal and neighbouring states for Class 10 and 12 exams this year due to tough measures against the cheating mafia,” said UPSEB secretary Neena Srivastava.“The number fell from 1.15 lakh students in 2017 to 1.12 lakh in 2018 to only 6,300 students in 2019 as they failed to connive with school managers for clearing the exams,” she said. A total of 58,06,922 students were registered for the exams, of which 31,95,603 belong to high school. A majority of the students who have dropped out of the exams belong to Class 10, said officials. At least 21% of the total centres in the state have been categorised as either sensitive or most sensitive due to cases of copying last year.Further, the registration of 12,888 students who had applied to appear for the exams from two or more centres was cancelled. The state had made amendments to the forwarding policy to weed out duplicate applications and break the nexus of copying mafia and centre managers, claimed Shivlal, additional secretary, UPSEB.Former Allahabad University professor M C Chattopadhyay cautioned about the declining numbers of students, “Around 11 lakh students had skipped the exams in 2018 and now the figure has reached over six lakh within first nine days of the exams itself. So, how did the strict measures really help improve overall scenario? The state government should revamp the education system and address the core issue.”Despite surveillance by CCTV cameras, monitoring by the UP special task force and the use of barcoded copies in every centre, 252 students were caught cheating in the past nine days. On Friday, around 18 girls and boys were caught cheating in physics, commerce and painting papers. Last year, CCTVs were not audio-fitted due to which invigilators had resorted to dictating answers to students. This year, high-quality audio-fitted surveillance system has been made mandatory and an order has been issued to preserve the video footages till the completion of the exam process.
