Sack Kashmiris or face consequences, UP sugar mill warned

New Delhi, February 22, 2019 (PPI-OT): A farmers’ outfit in Uttar Pradesh’s Muzaffarnagar area has warned a sugar mill to throw out Kashmiri workers as soon as possible or face dire consequences. The warning came just a day after rightwing groups threatened Mansoorpur Sugar Mill management to sack Kashmiri workers, reported The Times of India.

The report said a farmers’ outfit, Bharatiya Kisan Union Tomar, warned Khatauli-based Triveni Sugar Mill to do the same or face consequences. The report said there are 74 Kashmiris working in the mill. “The management has sought three days time to deal with the matter,” it reported. Vishal Ahlawat, a member of the outfit, warned if the mill did not sack the workers, they would remove them.

After the threats to Kashmiri workers, the security around the mill has been tightened, the report said. On the other hand, India’s National Human Rights Commission has issued notices to the ministries of Home and Human Resource Development and the state governments of West Bengal, Uttarakhand and Uttar Pradesh, seeking reports over attacks on Kashmiris in wake of the Pulwama incident.

The Commission has also issued a notice to the Delhi Police commissioner and asked the ministries to submit the report on the matter within two weeks. It has given chief secretaries of the states four weeks time to send their reports.

The Commission said such kinds of attacks cannot be accepted in a civilized society. It asserted that the Indian government should take action against the miscreants. It observed that the reports raise serious issue of violation of human rights.

Meanwhile, the Indian Supreme Court, today, directed Chief Secretaries and DGPs of 11 states to take prompt and necessary action to prevent incidents of threat, assault and social boycott of Kashmiris in the aftermath of Pulwama incident.

A bench headed by Chief Justice, Ranjan Gogoi, also directed that police officers, who were earlier appointed as nodal officers to deal with incidents of mob lynching, would be now responsible to deal with cases of assault on Kashmiris. The bench asked the Ministry of Home Affairs to give wide publicity to nodal officers so that they can be approached by those facing such incidents.

For more information, contact:

Kashmir Media Service

Phone: +92-51-4435548, +92-51-4435549

Fax: +92-51-4861736

Email: info@kmsnews.org

Website: www.kmsnews.org
