Standoff between Pakistan, India ‘very dangerous’, Trump warns

President of the United States of America Donald Trump has warned that the standoff between Pakistan and neighbours, India is ‘very dangerous’.

Trump voiced the alarm following a deadly attack against Indian forces in Kashmir.

“It’s very dangerous situation between the two countries,” Trump told reporters on Friday in the White House.

“Right now there is a lot of problems between India and Pakistan because of what happened,” he said.

Pakistani authorities have sternly warned that they will respond to any attack by India with “full force”.

The warning was issued by the Pakistani army on Friday amid heightened tensions between the nuclear-armed neighbours, as Islamabad said it took over the base of a militant group that claimed the deadly bombing in Kashmir.

Read also: VENEZUELA: Maduro vows not to relinquish power, describes US food aid as ‘mere crumbs’

Army spokesman Major General Asif Ghafoor says Pakistani forces have taken over of Jaish’s headquarters in a southern Punjab province district bordering India.

“We have no intention to initiate war, but we will respond with full force to full spectrum threat that would surprise you,” Ghafoor told reporters in the garrison city of Rawalpindi. “Don’t mess with Pakistan,” he added.

Moments after the deadly Kashmir attack, India’s Prime Minister Narendra Modi promised a “strong response” and also called for “the complete isolation of Pakistan” for harbouring the armed group behind the devastating attack.

“We will give a befitting reply,” Modi said in a speech on Friday morning, soon after he called his security advisers to consider a response to the worst attack on Indian security forces in decades.

“Those who committed this heinous act will pay a heavy price. Those who supported it will definitely be punished,” he was quoted as saying by the Indian Express newspaper.

Join the conversation

Opinions

Support Ripples Nigeria, hold up solutions journalism

Balanced, fearless journalism driven by data comes at huge financial costs.

As a media platform, we hold leadership accountable and will not trade the right to press freedom and free speech for a piece of cake.

If you like what we do, and are ready to uphold solutions journalism, kindly donate to the Ripples Nigeria cause.

Your support would help to ensure that citizens and institutions continue to have free access to credible and reliable information for societal development.

Donate Now
