Gilani condemns Pakistani prisoner’s lynching in Jaipur jail

Srinagar, February 22, 2019 (PPI-OT): In occupied Kashmir, the Chairman of All Parties Hurriyat Conference (APHC), Syed Ali Gilani has strongly condemned the lynching of a Pakistani prisoner at Central Jail in Jaipur, the capital of Indian state of Rajasthan.

Syed Ali Gilani in a statement issued in Srinagar said the aftermath of Pulwama incident has created an unending wave of hatred and humiliation. He said satisfying their urge and lust for blood, goons from the Hindu community in Jaipur Jail have targeted a fellow prisoner from Pakistan and lynched him to death, glorifying and satisfying their patriotic sentiments.

He said, “Anybody under the captivity qualifies for basic and fundamental rights and safeguarding their live is of prime importance and responsibility of its captors, but Indian rulers and their biased jail authorities very brazenly encourage their goons to flex their muscles on these helpless inmates to satisfy their lust and hate sentiments.”

Syed Ali Gilani said Kashmiri prisoners in different jails of India are scared and living under constant threat to their life. Such fear psychosis has caused panic not only to them but to their families as well, he added. The APHC Chairman appealed to the world human rights organizations particularly the International Committee of Red Cross and Amnesty International to ensure the safety and well-being of every prisoner in Indian jails.

He thanked the members of Sikh community for their timely moral, physical and financial support to the Kashmiris in India. “When dark and gloomy clouds of hyper nationalism were looming large and the thirst of blood of Kashmiris was at its zenith, Sikh community and its brave youth dared extremists and extended their helping hand to the oppressed and depressed Kashmiris,” he said.

Meanwhile, the APHC while reacting to media reports on withdrawal of security to its chairman, Syed Ali Gilani, in a statement in Srinagar said it is a brazen lie and such ridiculous reports need only to be laughed at.

“Gilani has never been provided with any security by the Indian government,” it said, adding Indian rulers and their local stooges always try to hoodwink the world by this unrealistic and false propaganda through their paid media houses. “He continues to be confined in his house for the last nine years. Forcibly occupying the gates and then claiming it to be the security is such a ridiculous report that the Indian government and its agencies should be ashamed of,” it added.

For more information, contact:

Kashmir Media Service

Phone: +92-51-4435548, +92-51-4435549

Fax: +92-51-4861736

Email: info@kmsnews.org

Website: www.kmsnews.org
