Trump calls Indo-Pak conflict ‘very dangerous situation’

Monitoring Desk

WASHINGTON: US President Donald Trump has showed concerns over the recent development in South Asia and termed the Pak-India clash ‘very dangerous situation’.

President said this while talking to media representatives on Friday in the Oval Office after meeting with the senior Chinese official.

He said that it’s very dangerous situation between the two countries. We would like to see it stop and adding that the United States was seeking talks with Pakistan.

Tensions have soared between the nuclear-armed rivals since a suicide attack last week killed 41 soldiers in Indian-occupied Kashmir, the deadliest attack in years.

“India is looking at something very strong. India just lost almost 50 people with an attack. So I can understand that also,” Trump said.

India has been demanding action against militants that Prime Minister Narendra Modi alleged are from Pakistan and its premier under pressure from his Hindu nationalist base to show firmness weeks before he is set to call elections.

The Pakistan Army on Friday warned India against any “misadventure,” saying it was capable of responding.

The US in recent years has allied with India, seeing common interests with a fellow democracy that has been battling extremists.

The Trump administration last year cut off $300 million in military aid to Pakistan, saying that Islamabad has not done enough to fight extremists at home or close safe havens for militants in neighbouring Afghanistan.

“Pakistan was taking very strong advantage of the United States under other presidents,” Trump said. “I ended that payment because they weren’t helping us in a way that they should have.”

‘US has developed ‘much better’ relations with Pakistan recently’

Trump also said United States has developed a “much better” relationship recently with Pakistan, which has long been at odds with the US over the war in Afghanistan.

Trump noted that relations had improved over the “last short period of time” and added that the US may set up some meetings with Pakistan.
