'Our fight is for Kashmir, not against Kashmiris': PM Modi urges citizens to shield Kashmiris from violence

PM Narendra Modi at a public rally in Tonk, Rajasthan February 23 I Photo credit: ANI | Photo Credit: ANI

Tonk, Rajasthan: Prime Minister Narendra Modi on Saturday for the first time after attacks on Kashmiris in the aftermath of Pulwama attack, warned against targetting of Kashmiri students. "India’s fight is for Kashmir not against Kashmir, not against Kashmiris," Modi said. "What happened to Kashmiri students in last few days, such things should not happen in this country,” he said at a public meeting in Tonk.

Amid calls to avenge the martyrs of Pulwama, Modi had a warning for the perpetrators too. “Is baar pura hisab lenge (We will settle the books in full this time),” Modi said assuring the gathering that all 40 lives of CRPF troops lost in the suicide bombing will be avenged completely.

#WATCH PM Modi in Tonk, Rajasthan says "Pichhle dino kahan kya hua, ghatna chhoti thi ki badi thi, Kashmiri baccho ke saath Hindustan ke kisi kone mein kya hua kya nahi hua, mudda yeh nahi hai. Iss desh mein aisa hona nahi chahiye." pic.twitter.com/MUC65khffu — ANI (@ANI) February 23, 2019

In the aftermath of the Pulwama attack, in which a 19-year-old Jaish-e-Mohammed (JeM) terrorist Adil Ahmad Dar was identified as the suicide bomber, several cases of harassment and violence against Kashmiri student were reported from different states. "This should not have happened," said the Prime Minister.

Former Jammu & Kashmir chief minister and National Conference leader Omar Abdullah, who attacked Modi earlier for his silence on attacks on Kashmiris thanked him for the statement saying today you spoke about what’s close to our heart.

India's Ministry of External Affairs (MEA) blamed Pakistan for allowing JeM to use its territory to target India. JeM also claimed the responsibility of the February 14 Pulwama attack.

At Tonk, Modi said when Pakistan's new Prime Minister Imran Khan was elected, he told the latter that together they should work to fight poverty and illiteracy. "He told me he was the son of a Pathan and will stand by his words. Now is a good time to stand by the promise he made," Modi said.

The Prime Minister after warning against any attacks on Kashmiris said it is the duty of citizens to Rajasthan urged the citizens to defend Kashmiris if they see any wrong

"Hindustan ke kisi bhi kone mein, mera Kashmir ka lal, uski hifaazat karna mere Hindustan ke har nagrik ka kaam hai (It is the duty of every citizen to defend my Kashmiri sons no matter in which part of the country they are in)," Modi said

PM also gave the slogan of 'Nayi Niti, Nayi Riti (New Policy, New Culture) signalling a shift in government's stance on various issues in the run-up to Lok Sabha elections 2019.
