PM Modi's fiery attack on Imran Khan: Time to see if 'son of Pathan' stands by his words

Follow us on PM Modi attacks Imran Khan over Pulwama terror attack

In a direct attack at Pakistan PM Imran Khan, Prime Minister Narendra Modi on Saturday said it was time to test if the "son of Pathan" stands by his words. The prime minister was addressing a gathering in Rajasthan's Tonk when he made the scathing attack, in wake of the deadly terror attack in Jammu and Kashmir's Pulwama which claimed lives of 40 CRPF personnel.

"When Pakistan got a new prime minister, I congratulted him (Imran Khan). I had said that we should together fight against poverty and illiteracy. Imran Khan had said to me that he was son of a Pathan and will stand by his words. Now is the time to test if he will stand by his words," Modi said.

Paying homage to the CRPF martyrs, the prime minister peace in the world is not possible if terrorism continues. He said a strong consensus has been reached against terrorism today and the entire world is with the families of those killed in the Pulwama attack.

"Not just India, the entire world is with you (families). Have faith in soldiers and the government," he said.

“Peace in the world is not possible if terror factory continues to go on like this. Today, there is a consensus against terrorism. We are moving ahead with strength at every front,” Modi said while addressing the Vijay Sankalp rally.

The Kashmiri youth is also disturbed by terrorism and "our fight is not against Kashmiris". They are with people of the country, he said.

Modi said stern action has been taken against separatists in Jammu and Kashmir, and a "free hand" has been given to the Army.

"Believe in army jawans on the borders, Maa Bhawani blessings and Modi government, all scores will be settled this time," he said.

“People of Kashmir lined up for donating blood for those injured in firing during the Amarnath yatra last year. Our fight is against terrorism and against those who are against humanity,” the prime minister said.

He said people in Kashmir have been suffering from terrorism for the last 40 years and they want peace too.

There was 70-75 per cent voting in the recent panchayat elections, Modi said.

FULL VIDEO:

Latest India News
