Safeguard democracy, says Governor

Sathasivam lays stress on the role of youth in improving the democratic system in the country

Governor P. Sathasivam has cautioned against the growing tendency among citizens to abstain from the democratic process in the country.

Inaugurating a three-day National Students’ Parliament Kerala – 2019 at the Kerala Legislature Complex here on Saturday, Mr. Sathasivam said there were many who criticised politics and political activity, while craving for a benevolent dictator.

He said that many did not realise that exercising one’s right to franchise was the ‘mother of all rights’ under the Constitution and that responsible citizens were the lifeline of any democracy.

He stressed on the role of youth in improving the democratic system.

“There are many nations around us with lesser population and less diversity compared to us. No democracy in the world is truly perfect and every democracy corrects and improves on itself. Parliamentary democracy cannot be perfected overnight,” he said.

While recollecting from his personal experience, he lauded the political courtesy that was upheld by members of the Kerala Legislature.

The leaders of the State were shining examples for others, Mr. Sathasivam said.

Speaking on the occasion, Finance Minister T.M. Thomas Isaac said the State had succeeded in eliminating caste discrimination.

Caste and religion

“There is no place for caste and political interventions on the basis of religion in a democratic society.” Mr. Thomas Isaac said.

Leader of the Opposition Ramesh Chennithala called for fundamental changes in the system of party politics. “Political parties should bring about changes in their programmes in accordance with the changing times. Politics should not become the last resort for loafers,” Mr. Chennithala said.

Speaker P. Sreeramakrishnan presided over the inaugural session. Deputy Speaker V. Sasi, UNICEF representative in India Yasmin Ali Haque, MIT World Peace University executive president Rahul V. Karad and Kerala Legislative Assembly secretary V.K. Babu Prakash spoke on the occasion.
