Modi softens his tone, urges PM Imran Khan 'lets fight against poverty and illiteracy'

MUMBAI: A day after Prime Minister Imran authorised the armed forces to respond decisively and comprehensively to any aggression or misadventure by India, Indian Prime Minister Narendra Modi has softened his tone and urged Imran 'let us fight against poverty and illiteracy'.



Indian PM Narendra Modi, while addressing a rally in Rajasthan, said it is time his Pakistani counterpart Imran Khan stood by his words like he (Khan) had told him after coming into power.

Modi, while addressing public gathering in Rajasthan, said “When Imran Khan was elected as Prime Minister, I congratulated him. I had told him that we together should fight against poverty and illiteracy. Imran Khan had said to me that he was son of a Pathan and will stand by his words.”

He went on to say "I told Imran Khan there have been plenty of fights between Pakistan and India. I told him let us fight against poverty and illiteracy.”

Indian PM said, “Today, it is the time Imran Khan should stand by his words.”

PM Imran Khan Tuesday warned India against any misadventure in the wake of Pulwama attack and said "Pakistan would not think, but immediately retaliate."



In a televised address to the nation, Prime Minister Imran Khan reacted to the sabre-rattling, in particular by the Indian media, calling for a surgical strike against Pakistan, and expressed the hope that "better sense will prevail."

He said "if Indians believe that they can launch an attack on Pakistan, they should understand that Pakistan would not think, but retaliate immediately as there will be no other option."

Imran Khan said "no law in the world allows anyone or a country to be the "judge, jury and executioner" and said if India offered any proof, Pakistan would cooperate.

"We all know that it is easy to start a war, but very difficult to end. And we do not know where it will lead to."

The Prime Minister offered the Indian government to fully cooperate in any kind of investigation it wanted into the Pulwama incident.

He also asked for tangible, credible and intelligence-based evidences which should be shared and expressed the resolve that Pakistan would take action.

The prime minister regretted Indian posture of preconditioning the Kashmir issue with talks over terrorism, and said that Pakistan was ready for a dialogue on this issue as it was affecting the whole region.

He said Pakistan had been the worst victim of curse of terrorism in the last fifteen years.

The prime minister, expressing his wonder over the swift and baseless Indian allegations in the aftermath of Pulwama incident, questioned Indian leadership what were the advantages Pakistan hoped to get out of such attack.
