Follow Gen Bajwa’s vision for peace, ISPR tells Indian COAS

Ag Agencies

RAWALPINDI/ISLAMABAD: Indian army chief General Bipin Rawat should follow Chief of Army Staff (COAS) General Qamar Javed Bajwa’s vision for regional peace, said Director General Inter Services Public Relations (ISPR) Maj. Gen. Asif Ghafoor in a statement on Saturday.

General Asif Ghafoor’s comment comes in the wake of India’s aggressive posture post-Pulwama suicide bombing which it blamed on Pakistan in a knee-jerk reaction.

Responding to General Ghafoor’s comments, Indian Army Chief General Bipin Rawat said he followed his Pakistani counterpart General Qamar Javed Bajwa.

In an interview with a journalist, when General Bipin was asked what was his view on General Ghafoor’s comment, he said, “I follow him. I follow him in whatever he says. I keep taking a feedback. I know where he visits, all that I do follow him.”

General Rawat further commented, “Clearly, he is the Chief of Pakistan Army so I have to.”

In a related development, the Foreign Office spokesman says a Crisis Management Cell has been set up in the ministry in the wake of deteriorating situation between Pakistan and India following the February 14 attack in the IHK.

The cell will keep all stakeholders updated over the border situation and diplomatic contacts, and it will remain operational throughout the week without any break.

In a telephone call to his UAE counterpart, Foreign Minister Shah Mehmood Qureshi said he was looking forward to his upcoming visit to the UAE for the OIC Council of Foreign Ministers Meeting (CFM).

He informed the UAE Foreign Minister Sheikh Abdullah bin Zayed Al Nahyan that in spite of baseless Indian allegations and the aggressive rhetoric emanating from India, in a spirit of constructive engagement Pakistan had offered cooperation in investigating the incident (Pulwama attack) and asked India to share any actionable evidence in this regard.

“Pakistan desires a peaceful neighbourhood, but would retaliate against any Indian adventurism,” said Qureshi.

He told Sheikh Zayed that India was doing politics on the Pulwama suicide bombing.

Meanwhile, the two countries are expected to come face to face for the first time since the Pulwama terrorist attack in Indian Held Kashmir, on March 1-2 in Abu Dhabi, where the 46th session of the Organization of Islamic Cooperation Foreign Ministers Conference will be held.

New Delhi has accepted a special invitation as “a guest of honor” to the inaugural plenary foreign ministers conclave and Minister for External Affairs Sushma Swaraj is accepted to attend.

Swaraj has been invited by Sheikh Abdullah bin Zayed Al Nahyan, Foreign Minister of the United Arab Emirates, as the “Guest of Honour” to address the inaugural plenary in Abu Dhabi.

“The friendly country of India has been named as the guest of honor in view of its great global political stature as well as its time-hounoured and deeply rooted cultural and historical legacy, and its important Islamic component,” the UAE government said announcing invite to India for OIC meet.

Reports say Turkey and Bangladesh also played an important role to get India inside the OIC CFM.

The Indian Ministry of External Affairs said, “This is a welcome recognition of the presence of 185 million Muslims in India of their contribution to its pluralistic ethos and of India’s contribution to the Islamic world”.

Qureshi also telephoned Nepal’s Foreign Minister Pradeep Kumar Gyawali and Sri Lankan Foreign Minister Tilak Marapana to update them on the regional situation arising after the Pulwama terrorist attack.

Qureshi said Pakistan desired a peaceful neighbourhood, but would retaliate against any Indian adventurism.

Talking to Pradeep Kumar, Qureshi said Saarc was a forum established to bring the countries of the region together and therefore Nepal as the chair could play a constructive role in this regard.

Pakistan attaches great importance to its neighbours and South Asia and believes in lasting peace, he said.

The Nepali foreign minister said peace and security of the region was a primary responsibility of all.

“Nepal as a member of Saarc and friend of Pakistan firmly believes that peace is in the interest of everyone,” he added.

Talking to Tilak Marapana, Qureshi said Pakistan attached great importance to its ties with Sri Lanka, which was an important neighbor and friend.

Further elaborating, he said Pakistan was a responsible country which desired peace and stability in the region.

“Peace is a precursor for socio-economic benefits and prosperity.”

He also informed the Sri Lankan foreign minister that in his letter to the President of UNSC, he had underscored the importance of maintaining a peaceful South Asia.

In his response the Sri Lankan Foreign Minister said that his country staunchly supports peace in the region and reiterates that maintaining stability in South Asia should be a priority for all countries.

The armed forces have also been put on high alert to thwart any Indian misadventure from air, ground or water.

All options are ready on the table but it has been decided at the official level that Pakistan will not press the panic button and allow the Indian political and military leadership to think in the cold light of the day the consequences of any hostile action against it.
