Anyone politisicing PM-KISAN scheme will face farmers’ wrath: PM Modi

Gorakhpur: Prime Minister Narendra Modi on Sunday launched the Pradhan Mantri Kisan Samman Nidhi Yojna and warned that anyone politicising the scheme will face the wrath of farmers.

“I warn those state governments who are looking to play politics with the scheme, if you indulge in this then curse of the farmers will destroy your politics. I appeal to farmers, don’t be misled by anyone,” he said addressing a rally here.

The scheme, announced in the interim budget presented in Lok Sabha on February 1, will provide Rs 6,000 per year to small and marginal farmer families having combined land holding/ownership of upto 2 hectares. The amount will be given in three installments of Rs 2,000 each.

Attacking the Mahagathbandhan being formed by Congress and other parties ahead of the general elections, the Prime Minister said, “‘Mahamilavti’ logon ke moonh utre huye the Parliament mein jab scheme batayi gyi.”

The amount will be transferred directly to the bank account of the beneficiaries through Direct Benefit Transfer (DBT) to ensure transparency in the entire process and save time of the farmers.

The Prime Minister said, “Farmers who have not received the first installment today will get the first installment amount in the coming weeks. This money would be given by the central government. To avail the scheme, the state government has to prepare a list of the farmers and send it to the Centre.”

Launching a scathing attack on Congress over its loan waiver schemes in Madhya Pradesh, Rajasthan and Chhattisgarh, Modi said, “For us, loan waivers would have been an easy and convenient option…We also could have distributed ‘rewri’ (sweets) for political and election benefits, but we can’t commit such a crime. Loan waiver benefits only a select few.”

“This is New India, The money that the central government sends to the farmer, the full amount goes to his account. Gone are the days when the government sent 100 paise and out of which 85 paise went into the pocket of the middlemen. We have made this scheme foolproof so that no one can steal the rights of the farmers,” he said.

In his address, he said, “Over the last four-and-a-half years, the government has given more than 17 crore soil health cards in two phases. A number of efforts are being made to provide fair prices of produce to the farmers and lower their costs.”

The “e-NAM” platform is working to connect hundreds of markets across the country which will in turn give the farmers the option to sell their produce online in any market in the country directly, the Prime Minister added.

[source_without_link]ANI[/source_without_link]
