'Political environment favourable' for my return, says Musha...

(MENAFN- Gulf Times) All-Pakistan Muslim League (APML) chief and former military ruler General (retired) Pervez Musharraf sees the 'political environment in Pakistan as 'favourable for his return, although he has no immediate plans to come back.

Speaking at a news conference in Dubai on Friday evening, the former president said in response to a question that several members in the cabinet of Prime Minister Imran Khan were 'his people, but it would be 'unusual to expect and ask the government 'to plead his case before the courts.

'In my opinion, the political environment is good and favourable. Half of the [present] ministers are mine. [The] law minister and the (incumbent) attorney general were my lawyers, responded a visibly frail Musharraf, telling the reporter that he was expecting this question.

'Pakistan is my country. My roots are there. My relatives and friends are there. I will definitely go there, the APML chief said.

But immediately, he said, he could not 'jump like fools and would do it under a strategy.

Musharraf, who has been living in self-exile in Dubai, also hit out at the country's two major political parties the Pakistan Muslim League Nawaz (PML-N) and the Pakistan Peoples Party (PPP) and termed both Nawaz Sharif and Asif Ali Zardari as 'plunderers.

He particularly attacked PPP leader and former president Zardari, alleging that he had been involved in a number of cases of 'murder and extortion.

He alleged that the former president had forcefully acquired some 40 houses around Bilawal House in Karachi at a very low price.

Musharraf advised the media to work against both Zardari and Sharif who, according to him, had 'destroyed the country.

During the news conference, Musharraf introduced his party's chairman Hidayatullah Kheshgi, who he said would reorganise the APML.

He said that there is talk about his illness, and that people have started saying that the APML is 'finished.

Musharraf said that his health condition was improving, and that he is also busy with a South African personal trainer at a gym on a regular basis.

According to the former military ruler, who had ran the country for nearly nine years after throwing out the elected PML-N government in a military coup in 1999, the main purpose of his party is 'to keep Asif Zardari and Nawaz Sharif out of politics.

He said: 'The APML will do whatever possible to keep both of them out of politics.

The former military ruler said his party would continue to support the government of the Pakistan Tehreek-e-Insaf (PTI) that emerged as the third 'political force in the country.

He said that if any attempt is made to dislodge the present government, his party would extend its support to the PTI.

During the news conference, the former president called for the establishment of relations with Israel.

Musharraf said that there is a need to break the alliance between India and Israel, and Pakistan could do it very easily.

He said that the Hindu and Jewish lobby is very strong in the media and unfortunately, India had a greater say in the international community.

Musharraf claimed that Israel wants to establish relations with Pakistan.

Mentioning that both Pakistan and Israel are facing 'existential threats, he recalled his efforts to build relations with Israel when he was in power.

He said he had addressed the American Jewish Congress in New York.

Musharraf said that it was due to his efforts that the then-foreign minister Khursheed Kasuri had a meeting with his Israeli counterpart in Turkey.

He also said that tension between the neighbouring nuclear powers, India and Pakistan, had again reached a 'dangerous level.

A similar situation had developed in 2002 when India had deployed its army, navy and air force along Pakistan's border for 10 months, he said.

However, Musharraf added, India backed off after seeing Pakistan's readiness.

The former army chief said that while India has the advantage in some areas in Kashmir and that it could launch a 'surgical strike, Pakistan has advantages in other areas.

Musharraf suggested that the Pakistan army have a plan to deal with any possible Indian move.

In response to a question, he termed the talks about any nuclear attack as 'rubbish, and said that if Pakistan would attack India with one atomic bomb, then the neighbouring country could 'finish us by attacking with 20 bombs.

'The only solution is that we should first attack them with 50 atom bombs so that they cannot hit us with 20 bombs. Are you ready to first launch an attack with 50 bombs? he remarked in response to a question about the possibility of any nuclear war between the two countries.

'It is not so simple. Do not talk like this. There is always a military strategy, he added.

Musharraf said that if India launched any attack in Kashmir, Pakistan could respond in other areas in Sindh and Punjab, and could teach them a lesson.

On Afghanistan, the former president is of the opinion that if the US would withdraw its troops, there would be a 'civil war in Kabul.

He presented three possible scenarios after the US withdrawal.

He said that either a civil war would start in the country among Afghan, Uzbek and Tajik warlords, or the Taliban would dominate the country, or the Northern Alliance with the support of India could take control of some of the areas.

In this scenario, he said Pakistan and India could also indulge in a proxy war in Afghanistan.

Interestingly, both the PPP and the PML-N have strongly reacted to Musharraf's remarks about Israel, but ignored his criticism against their leadership.

PPP parliamentary leader in the Senate, Sherry Rehman, said in a statement that the entire country is shocked by Musharraf's pro-Israel statements.

'Israel cannot tolerate Palestinian Muslims, how would it ever tolerate a nuclear power like Pakistan? she asked.

Rehman said that such statements gave credence to the controversy over an Israeli journalist's tweet that an Israeli jet had flown from Tel Aviv to Islamabad in October last year.

'The government must immediately respond and clarify Pakistan's stance, she demanded.

Former foreign minister and PML-N leader Khawaja Asif posted on Twitter a TV grab of Musharraf's comments about Israel and stated: 'General Musharraf has been out of power for 11 years, but it seemed he was still intoxicated with power.







MENAFN2402201900670000ID1098165554
