Pulwama and political vagaries

BJP

terrorism

Lahore

Venkaiah Naidu

Indian Army

Atal Bihari Vajpayee

Twelve days are a reasonable period to look at the repercussions of the Pulwama tragedy in a larger scenario that is generally bereft of political certainties in the run-up to the general election.Going by conventional wisdom, a serious assault on the country’s security should favour the incumbent government at the Centre. Theand Prime Minister Narendra Modi consistently advocated a muscular policy towards Pakistan and domestic, especially in Jammu and Kashmir. Except that in Modi’s tenure, the soft underbelly of India-Pakistan relations exposed by previous governments also showed up. As it did when he made an unscheduled but trumpeted landing in Pakistan in December 2015 to mark his presence at the wedding of former Prime Minister Nawaz Sharif’s granddaughter, only to face the music from the Jaish-e-Mohammad months later at Uri. Thestopover was indulgently passed off as an aberration by the Sangh Parivar. The RSS quickly doused the noises of disapproval from within, extolled the surgical strike following the Uri attack, and propagated it successfully in a few assembly elections.Post Pulwama, India has not exactly shot from the hip. Instead, the RSS and the BJP allowed their steamed up cadre to vent their visceral anger on a most vulnerable target: Kashmiris living outside of J&K—studying, engaging in small trade or doing odd jobs. Among the students were the recipients of the PM’s special scholarship scheme that was launched in 2011by the UPA government to facilitate access for J&K students in higher education institutions outside their troubled state. Many who faced the attackers’ wrath returned to Kashmir.PM Modi finally broke his silence on the unsavoury and unwanted but not unintended fallout of Pulwama at a political meeting in Rajasthan’s Tonk on Saturday. He said the state’s fight was not against Kashmir or Kashmiris but against separatists. Perhaps the burden of the Seoul Peace Prize 2018 that he received last week for his “contribution to international cooperation” weighed down on him. If domestic peace can’t be enforced, what good is a flattering international citation?His Tonk statement was a throwback to July 2016. After the cow vigilantes serially set upon and lynched “offenders”, who were Muslims and Dalits, Modi was pushed to publicly castigating the “gau rakshaks”. His words meant nothing because the gau army fired again in no time. The catalyst for Modi’s warning then was the reaction among Gujarat’s Dalits who faced the backlash from the vigilantes. Elections were upon him and the BJP was in danger of losing the Dalit votes.What was the compulsion on Saturday? Primarily, the RSS and the BJP’s assessment that the displays of fanatical patriotism since February 15 could become politically counterproductive. Last week, when Satyapal Singh, the former Mumbai police commissioner who’s now a minister in the Modi government, dropped by with a retinue at Basi Tikari village in Uttar Pradesh’s Meerut district for the funeral of Sepoy Ajay Kumar, he was besieged by the villagers, asking if he had come to solicit their votes early in the day. Singh darted away. The visuals of BJP’s Unnao MP, Sakshi Maharaj, beaming at the crowds while accompanying the cortege of a slain CRPF soldier and of Moradabad Mayor Vinod Agarwal laughing aloud on a similar occasion in his city ran in a loop on UP’s channels and became the object of censure.Perhaps, M, the vice-president, served a cautionary tale to his party, the BJP, when he spoke in Nellore, Andhra Pradesh, on Saturday. Or maybe, it was a generic remark. Whatever, he said security and development must not be politicised because “if you start controversies, the cause is lost”.To the BJP, for long on the fringes of politics, a party’s intrinsic worth must be measured in electoral triumphs. Everything else is extrinsic. Two months before a general election, isn’t it excessive to expect the BJP not to mine Pulwama for votes? If Kargil was a consequence of a build-up of Pakistani soldiers on India’s terra firma that came to light only when a shepherd informed the Indian Army, there was no such luck this time. There was no shepherd to warn thethat a “jihadi” lurked in their midst. The suicide bombing of a CRPF truck right there, on Indian soil, reflects poorly on the Centre’s intelligence know-how (or its paucity).Yet, the BJP believes its campaign to “rally around” the nation to express solidarity with Modi and support his “larger mission” will relegate questions over intelligence failure to the background. The “larger mission” awaits but enough hurrahs are heard within the BJP over India’s “success” in networking the global powers to declare Pakistan a persona non grata and the clampdown on the Valley’s separatists.Make no mistake. The Sangh’s hardcore allegiants, who lumped the Uri incursion reluctantly, thirst for nothing less than a large splatter of blood, body bags from across the border and the handing over of Masood Azhar, the Jaish founder, who was released from an Indian jail in December 1999 to secure the lives of passengers on board a hijacked aircraft. The Sangh never forgave’s foreign minister, Jaswant Singh, and his national security adviser, Brajesh Mishra, for negotiating the swap.Right now, Modi is caught between the hammer and the anvil. Anything is conceivable. Faced with the elections, it’s early to call out the Pulwama denouement.
