State flunks potholes test, receives rap from Supreme Court panel

The delay

More than two months after being directed by the Centre to prepare a policy on compensation for pothole deaths, the state government is still dragging its feet.has now earned the ire of a Supreme Courtappointed committee.In a letter dated February 13 sent to the state government—a copy of which is with Mirror—the Committee on Road Safety questioned its failure in formulating such a policy despite accounting for the second highest pothole-related casualties in the country. A government official said the state is “in the process” of framing the policy.But the Committee on Road Safety’s patience has worn thin. It has set a deadline of March 31 for the state government to submit a compliance report on road safety measures.The committee also slammed the government for allegedly not following road safety guidelines set by the Bombay High Court in June last year, like putting up signage bearing the name of the agency taking up road repairs and offering a grievance redressal mechanism.“The committee notes that the state has not sent an appropriate note on the implementation of the orders of the High Court. The committee reiterated that a brief note on the implementation of orders regarding prevention of deaths due to potholes should be sent to the committee,” it said.The committee also expressed displeasure over “low” compensation offered by the state government in hit-andrun cases. Compensation for such accidents varies from case to case.The Committee on Road Safety had set the ball rolling on fixing accountability for pothole deaths after it told the Supreme Court in December last year that the country had seen 14,936 casualties in five years. Uttar Pradesh saw the highest death toll of 4,415; Maharashtra trailed with 2,136. It was based on the same committee’s recommendations that the Union ministry of road transport and highways had directed the Maharashtra transport department on December 11, 2018, to draw up a compensation plan.Mushtaq Ansari, a citizen activist, alleged that the state government has frequently turned a blind eye to road safety. “Pothole-related deaths have been largely ignored. Mumbaikars deserve better roads.”Jayshilan Raja Ayyakutty, 12,who was playing on an uneven road, died after a truck ran over him in Kalyan’s Rambaug.Aarav Atharale, 5,died after being run over a truck in Shivaji Chowk area. He was thrown of his father’s bike after it hit a pothole.Manisha Bhoir,a school attendant skidded at a pothole, fell of her bike and was crushed under the wheels of a truck at the same spot where Atharale lost his life.Hasim Hanif Shaikh, 40,a chicken vendor, died in Kongaon area after a truck hit a giant pothole and crashed onto the autorickshaw he was riding.A 45-year-old stable labourer, only known by his nickname ‘Anna’, died on the Kalyan-Nevali road near Dwarli village after he slipped in a pothole and came under a truck.Kalpesh Jadhav, a26-yearold a sand and vegetable supplier, was on his way home when his two-wheeler hit a pothole on Kalyan-Padga Road. He came under a truck and died. A 45-year-old stable labourer, only known by his nickname ‘Anna’, died on the Kalyan-Nevali road near Dwarli village after he slipped in a pothole and came under a truck.Sunny Vishwakarma, 27,died after falling into a pothole on the Sion-Panvel highway in Sanpada.Two siblings— Sachin Gharat, 10, Kamini Gharat, 15, were crushed under a gas tanker after the bike their father was riding skidded on a pothole on the Mumbai-Nashik highway near Asangaon railway station, Thane.A woman and her six-month-old son died after their bike hit a pothole illed with loose paver blocks in Dadar.
