Won’t partake in Maharashtra government’s tea party, says Opposition

Lashing out at the state government for failing on all fronts, the opposition Congress and Nationalist Congress Party said they would boycott Chief Minister Devendra Fadnavis' customary tea party on the eve of the budget session of Maharashtra legislature. Opposition parties questioned why the tea party had been organised while the country was grappling with the deaths of over 40 paramilitary personnel, including two from Maharashtra, in the Pulwama attacks.

Leaders of the opposition Radhakrishna Vikhe Patil said that the state had breached the trust of people over providing reservations to Marathas, Dhangars, and Muslims. Vikhe Patil added that despite the state government's promises, farmers had not been given the benefit of loan waivers and questioned why the work for memorials for Chatrapati Shivaji Maharaj and Dr Babasaheb Ambedkar had not been started despite the ground-breaking ceremony being conducted two years ago.

Vikhe Patil said the state government's decision to conduct recruitments for 72,000 posts is only an eyewash.

His counterpart in the state legislative council Dhananjay Munde alleged that the state government was not providing drinking water tankers to villages as it would expose the claims of its showpiece 'Jalyukta Shivar' or the water conservation scheme. He added that the state must relax norms for the grant of fodder camps for cattle in drought-affected areas and sought a third-party audit into the Jalyukta scheme.

Munde said that around 1 crore farmers were facing the brunt of drought and around 95 lakh hectare of farmland was affected. The state government had failed to procure necessary aid from the Centre.

Munde, who belongs to the NCP, said the Fadnavis regime was trying to shield those involved in alleged scams in acquisition of land for the bullet train project and Mumbai-Nagpur Samruddhi expressway. "Corruption has reached its zenith under this government," charged Munde, adding that 16 ministers in the state had been accused of graft or irregularities.

Munde said while the court had not stayed the erstwhile Congress-NCP's decision to grant quotas to Muslims, the state government had not taken measures to approve the benefit. He charged that All India Majlis E Ittehadul Muslimeen (AIMIM) chief Asaduddin Owaisi, who has tied up with Dr Babasaheb Ambedkar's grandson and Bharatiya Republican Paksha- Bahujan Mahasangh president Prakash Ambedkar had kept mum on the issue.

Munde demanded that the decision on quotas for Muslims be taken on the first day of the session.
