SC likely to hear petitions on Article 35A this week, Mufti warns ‘don’t blame Kashmiris for what will follow’

Supreme Court of India. | File image

Srinagar: The Supreme Court is likely to hear petitions on Article 35A this week, between February 26-28, a case that questions its validity, but is critical for peace, law and order in the state of Jammu and Kashmir. The provision included in the Indian Constitution in 1954 grants special rights and privileges to the people of the Valley.

However, there have been a lot of volatile reactions coming in favour of the act in the Constitution, with former Jammu and Kashmir chief minister and Peoples Democratic Party head Mehbooba Mufti saying that “tampering with Article 370 and Article 35A will render the Treaty of Accession null and void”.

“Article 370 is the constitutional connection between Jammu and Kashmir and the Indian Union. The instrument of accession is contingent on Article 370, which is inextricably linked to Article 35A. Any tampering will render Treaty of Accession null and void,” Mufti said on social media platform Twitter.

3. Instrument of accession is contingent on Article 370 which is inextricably linked to Article 35 A.

4. Any tampering will render Treaty of Accession null & void. — Mehbooba Mufti (@MehboobaMufti) February 24, 2019

She also said that the Valley is rife with speculation about the status of Article 35A. “Before taking a decision, the Government of India must consider that J&K was the only Muslim-majority state that chose a secular India over Pakistan during Partition,” she said.

However, she also sent out a warning in the aftermath of any ruling that goes against the interest of the Valley and said that “no one should blame Kashmiris for the developments that will follow such a hare-brained decision”.

5. Those frothing at the mouth & calling for its removal shouldnt blame Kashmiris for the developments that will follow such a hare brained decision. — Mehbooba Mufti (@MehboobaMufti) February 24, 2019

Meanwhile, the J&K administration on Sunday said its stance on the case remained unchanged and that "only an elected government would be able to take a stand on Article 35A before the apex court", news agency PTI reported.
