What is Article 35A and why are many Kashmiris opposed to removing it?

A file picture of protests held in Kashmir against the abolition of Article 35A. | Photo Credit: PTI

Article 35A is again in the news after the Pulwama terror attack and as the Supreme Court starts hearing a case regarding the validity of Article which deals with the state of Jammu and Kashmir.

There is tension in the Valley, with rumours about the possibility of Article 35A being revoked doing the rounds. Meanwhile, political parties and groups in favour of scrapping the Article say that is goes against the spirit of national unity.

So what exactly is Article 35A, and why is it in the middle of a controversy?

A 1952 agreement

Article 35A, which came into existence following an agreement between the central government and Jammu and Kashmir, gives special rights to permanent residents of the state.

Further, the state gets to decide who constitutes permanent residents.

Article 35A protects laws in the state concerning permanent residents from being challenged for being discriminatory.

For example, it gives power to the state’s Legislative Assembly to restrict non-permanent residents from buying or owning immovable property in J&K, making use of scholarship schemes sponsored by the state government, settling permanently there, etc.

The Article has been challenged by various groups including an NGO called ‘We the Citizens’.

For and against

Political parties from Kashmir such as the National Conference and PDP are opposed to the scrapping or dilution of Article 35A.

Last year, former Jammu and Kashmir chief minister and National Conference (NC) leader Farooq Abdullah told news agency ANI that his party “won't allow any changes in article 35A”.

However, according to a writ petition filed by We the Citizens, four representatives from the Valley were part of the Constituent Assembly that was involved in drafting Jammu and Kashmir’s Constitution and the state had not been accorded a special status.

Further, the petition claims that Article 370 was meant to be a “temporary” provision at that point of time, not a means to enact permanent amendments such as Article 35A, which is against the “spirit of oneness of India”.

While Article 370 grants special status to the state of Jammu and Kashmir, Article 35A gives power to the state legislature to not only define the state’s “permanent residents” but also their special rights and privileges.

Removal of Article 35A is an emotive issue in Kashmir. Former CM Mehbooba Mufti says that if it is scrapped, no one will remain to carry the Tricolour in the Valley. Meanwhile, former CM Omar Abdullah has issued an equally dire warning, saying such a move would be the death knell for Kashmir’s pro-India politics.
