Outcome Budget highlights Govt’s performance

To promote transparency, the Delhi Government has planned to exercise geo-mapping of Outcome Budget of Financial year 2019-20, under which capital project included in the Outcome Budget statement of any department along with the project name, nodal department and officer, timelines for completion will be tagged.

As per the Outcome Budget documents (2018-19), this initiative will promote full transparency in the Capital expenditure works of Government of National Capital Territory of Delhi (GNCTD).

The third day of ongoing annual Budgets session-2019 witnessed about the achievements of Delhi Government works against the target set by the ruling Aam Aadmi Party (AAP) Government in the national Capital.

Addressing the legislatures, Deputy Chief Minister Manish Sisodia who also holds Finance portfolio started Budget outcome speech with education and health.

Comparing the Outcome Budget Report (OBR) of 2018-19, Sisodia said, “Only three States —Uttarakhand , Andhra Pradesh and Gujarat released outcome Budgets, contained the outputs quantifiable at scheme level, but with limited linkage to quantifiable outcomes. “Delhi has , by far the most comprehensive Outcome Budget capturing specific indicators for the output and outcomes of governance at scheme level, he said.”

Sisodia, who holds the portfolio of Education also, said that, in the field of education, out of total indicators, 74 per cent indicators were on track while 12 per cent were off track while 14 per cent indicators were not applicable.

Notably, in Education, Directorate of Education (DoE) has set 186 indicators for 38 programmes/ schemes included in the Budget outcome for 2018-19.

Echoing its achievements ahead of the General Elections, Sisodia said, 3.30 Lakh students attended new programme “Mission Buniyad” during summer vacations to improve reading ability and solving Mathematics problems. “556 Special Training Centers (STCs) have been setup for mainstreaming the out of schoolchildren and 17178 children have been enrolled at STCs for being mainstreamed to appropriate classes in regular school,” said the Education Minister.

In the field of higher education, the Government claimed that under “Merit cum Means Linked Assistance Scheme’, around 2,865 applications have been received upto December 2018, which are highest in India.

Presenting the budget outcome , Sisodia said that under 56 programmes, 83 per cent of work in health sector has been done . “189 AAP Mohalla clinics have been established up to Dec-18 against the target of 530 clinics,” Sisodia said that 276 schools were covered for screening of health / nutrition status of students under the School Health Scheme against the target of 400 schools for 2018-19.

Out of total 2.81 lakh childrens screened, 1.57 lakh childrens were treated for general health issues.

In PWD, under 36 programmes of Public Works Department (PWD), in one of the major project of single flyover from Munirka to Army hospital on the outer Ring Road , Delhi Government claim that 62 per cent have been done so far while remaining is likely to be completed by June 2019.

The Government, facing criticism on its failure to combat air pollution claiming thousands of deaths due to inhalation of toxic air, claiming in Assembly that 444 stack samples pertaining emission of industries, power plants and hotels were tested till December 2018 against the target of 700 samples during 2018-19.

“1226 DG sets , four percent DG sets failed to meet the prescribed standards, 318 RWAs were provided financial assistance for the developments of parks. in financial year 2018-19, 26 Ambinet Air Quality monitoring stations are functional, the outcome budget report quoted. “To approve subsidy upto 5000 par Tandoor to restaurant to replace coal tandoor with electricity of gas based tandoors under green budget, 27.19 lakh plantation have been done while six new forest have been created under Creation and Maintenance of Urban Forest against the target of 12 city forest,” Government said in an official statement.
