Magnetic-stripe cards will get blocked from today

Some of the banks have blocked transactions with older magnetic stripe debit and credit cards and their customers who have not replaced their cards with the new ones having EMV chip-and-pin will not be able to transact through the ATMs from today.

RBI had set December 31, 2018 deadline for banks to complete their migration to EMV chip-and-pin payment cards. Banks have to replace the older magnetic-stripe cards by EMV chip-and pin cards and make the ATMs EMV technology compliant. Customers who do not have the new cards will not be able to withdraw money from ATMs if the banks have issued guidelines of blocking such transactions. The new card will work in the non-EMV compliant ATMs. But if a fraudulent transaction happens at an EMV non-compliant ATM, the bank which owns that particular ATM will be liable to pay the money even if the customer has account in a different bank, said Jidesh P V, head, digital banking, Federal Bank.

Many of the banks, who have blocked magstripe transactions, have put the onus of replacing the cards on the customers.

“All the issuers were required to replace their magstripe-only cards with Chip-and-PIN cards. Therefore, as I interpret the directive, with effect from 01 January 2019, only Chip-and-PIN cards would work at ATMs and Point-of-Sale (POS) machines,” said Niranjan Kumar Upadhye, general manager, fraud risk management division, Worldline India.

Around 20 per cent of the cards were not been replaced in the third week of December. India has over 42 million credit cards and about 990 million debit cards issued by all the banks. The work of replacing magnetic stripe cards with Chip-and- PIN cards had begun a few years before. Banks with smaller customer bases, technologically savvy banks and many foreign banks have managed to get most of their cards on the Chip- and- PIN platform. But still all the banks have not fully accomplished this task. Replacing the remaining 20 per cent cards within a few days was a difficult task.

“Practically this may pose a challenge for the banks which depend on external card personalisation bureaus or card vendors. These personalisation bureaus are used by most of the banks in India and have a limit on their daily throughput. As they work on “First In- First Out” basis, replacement cards are being personalised as per orders received,” said Upadhye. While cost is a big concern for the banks for adopting the new security technology, logistics also matters in case of cards. Most banks want to ensure that their customers’ addresses and contact details on file were current and accurate before dispatching the new cards. As regards ATMs, since many of them have not yet been converted to read and process chip-and-pin cards, it is felt that the non-compliant ATMs would still be able to accept such cards. “So people trying to withdraw cash are not likely to suffer, so long as their cards are Chip-and-PIN enabled. A doctrine that may be used to settle disputes and decide liability in cases of fraud, is that the “Non-compliant Party Pays,” he added. According to Rustom Irani, CEO, cash business, Hitachi Payment Services, of the 239,000 ATMs in the country, around 25,000 or less than 15 per cent are ready for the EMV chip-and-pin cards. “In the next 10 days, probably some more ATMs would be readied. But making all the remaining 2 lakh ATMs compliant may not be possible,” he said.
