Clouds over Kashmir

With hundreds of leaders linked to groups struggling for freedom in Indian-held Kashmir arrested , as security forces swarm the disputed territory and jets fly low over it, the tensions that have followed the Pulwama attack remain high. The harsh rhetoric from New Delhi, warning of retaliatory action, has fuelled the fires and prevented a sensible response to the more rational approach taken by Pakistan. Talk of war is always a grave matter when it comes to Kashmir, a region over which the two countries have fought two full-fledged wars and engaged in at least three more minor skirmishes.

Seemingly – and thankfully – the calls for war are beginning to die down or at least become less vociferous. For this, we need to thank the advocates of peace who have been active over the past many years. Their efforts, according to Indian analysts, have resulted in calls for war being considerably less than those after the Mumbai attacks of 2008. We hope now that the Indian media too will change its tone and stop pointing fingers at Islamabad alone. This approach solves no problems and in the present circumstances has acted only to drive forward a kind of hysteria. What we need instead is far more introspection within India and open discussion at all levels on the essential nature of the problem and why violence in IHK has become such an entrenched problem. The willingness on the part of so many young Kashmiris to lay down their lives or take up feeble weapons against well-armed security forces, demonstrates their desperation. This desperation arises from the violence inflicted by Indian forces on the people of the Valley. Hundreds have died, others have suffered torture or rape. A case continues to be heard by the Indian Supreme Court on the rape of at least 30 women in two Kashmiri villages in 1991.

The human rights abuses suffered by the people of Kashmir have to be stopped. So does the violence and the bloodshed. New Delhi must realise, now that the time has come to look into the Pulwama attack and other events with greater calm, that this can happen only through dialogue and discussion. Negotiations between all stakeholders are the only means available to find a solution to the Kashmir problem and bring to an end the loss of life and atrocities seen in the Valley year after year since Indian troops took over three decades ago.
