India behaved responsibly, didn't target civilians: Dean of Diplomatic Corps

Sean of Diplomatic Corps Hans Dannenberg Castellanos said the airstrikes targetted the terrorists who were planning future attacks on India.

Dean of Diplomatic Corps Hans Dannenberg Castellanos, who represents more than 150 foreign missions in India, on Tuesday said that the Indian Air Force's (IAF) airstrikes across the Line of Control (LoC) were very responsible. He said that the airstrikes targetted the terrorists who were planning future attacks on India and not the civilians.

"We want to congratulate Ministry of External Affairs (MEA) for quickly briefing us. The message was a direct one. It was a non-military preemptive strike. India wanted to target terrorists, not civilians. India behaved responsibly,"he said.

"The operation was a very directed one. It did not target any civilians. It did not target any military camp in Pakistan. It was done to avoid any further attacks in India," the dean of diplomatic corps said.

#Breaking

Dean of the Diplomatic Corps Amb Hans Castellano "we want to congratulate #MEA for quickly briefing us. Message was a direct one... It was a non-military preemptive strike. India wanted to target terrorists, not civilians. India behaved responsibly"#IndiaStrikesBack pic.twitter.com/dAhfBmVyrO Geeta Mohan (@Geeta_Mohan) February 26, 2019





He added that the IAF had credible intelligence that the people who were planning future attacks in India were in the facility that was destroyed in Balakot, Pakistan.

Meanwhile, Pakistan decided to raise the issue of "India's violation of the Line of Control" (LoC) at international forums after the IAF struck the Jaish-e-Mohammed's (JeM) biggest training camp in Balakot in Pakistan.

According to Geo News, the decision was taken at a high-level meeting chaired by Pakistan Prime Minister Imran Khan and attended by the civil and military leadership, including Army Chief General Qamar Jawed Bajwa and the Ministers of Defence and Foreign Affairs.
