India strikes back: Pakistan still in denial mode, says will take international media to verify claims

A Pakistan strategic affairs expert, from Islamabad, has accused the Indian Air Force (IAF) of violating the Paris Agreement on climate change because the airstrike deep inside the country led to some trees being knocked down. (File photo)

Pakistan continues to remain in denial mode even as the international fora has begun taking notice of the airstrike carried out by India on Jaish-e-Mohammed's (JeM) biggest training camp in Khyber Pakhtunkhwa.

The airstrike was conducted 12 days after the terroist group killed 40 Indian soldiers in a suicide bombing in Jammu and Kashmir's Pulwama.

But Pakistan says the airstrike did not damage anything on the Pakistani soil.

In furtherance of this, Pakistan Foreign Minister Shah Mahmood Qureshi said Islamabad would take international media to the area of the said strikes, but when the weather is fine.

"Pakistan will take the international media to the area of strikes. Helicopters are being readied. Right now, the weather is bad, but we will fly when the weather permits," Qureshi was quoted as saying by ANI.

Earlier in the day, in a series of tweets, Director General of Inter-Services Public Relations, Major General Asif Ghafoor, claimed that no infrastructure was damaged and the payload of the "hastily escaping Indian aircrafts fell in open". He also claimed that the Indian aircraft only managed to get into three-four miles of the Pakistani territory.

Well, Pakistan can continue to live in denial.. and maybe that’s in a strange way the best way to avoid a full fledged war.. https://t.co/kUnbY2omdG February 26, 2019

Violation of the Paris Agreement?

A Pakistan strategic affairs expert, from Islamabad, has accused the Indian Air Force (IAF) of violating the Paris Agreement on climate change because the airstrike deep inside the country led to some trees being knocked down.

No kidding. Pak strategic affairs expert from Pakistan just accused the Indian Air Force of violating the Paris Agreement on climate change because the airstrikes deep inside Pakistan led to some trees being knocked down. Happened for real. Delusion meets denial. Toxic cocktail. Rahul Kanwal (@rahulkanwal) February 26, 2019

'Only trees fell down'

A Pakistan journalist too claimed nobody was killed in the airstrike.

Syed Noman Ali Shah, a Pakistani journalist in an exclusive conversation with India Today TV's Rahul Kanwal, said, "We reached the spot at 6 am according to Pakistan Standard Time. There is local election that had to take place in the Khyber Pakhtunkhwa province. But we did not see anything major. No dead body was being carried. Nothing had happened."

"We just saw a few fallen trees. The only damage we could see was done to the forest area," the journalist added.

The Bollywood effect?

Imran Khan's

Pakistan Tehreek-e-Insaf (PTI), the ruling party across the border, accused the Indian media of stirring up hysteria.

The PTI took to Twitter to deny the IAF had dropped any bombs on Pakistani territory.

We realise it’s election year, and a desperation across the border. Fact of the matter is, Indian jets were forced to retreat in haste by Pakistan army patrols and dumped fuel, which in their scramble they thought was a bomb. #Pakistan, one of the tweets read.

We realise it’s election year, and a desperation across the border. Fact of the matter is, Indian jets were forced to retreat in haste by Pakistan army patrols and dumped fuel, which in their scramble they thought was a bomb.#Pakistan PTI (@PTIofficial) February 26, 2019





25 top commanders killed, Ajit Doval tells CCS

NSA Doval, while addressing the CCS meeting in New Delhi, said the demolished target was not an ordinary terror launch pad or base. "It was a virtual garrison," he said, adding, "the facility had firing ranges, explosive test facilities, air-conditioned offices of trainers and barracks."

The facility was built with the assistance of the Army and the Inter-Services Intelligence (ISI), he added.

"As many as 25 top commanders were killed," the NSA further said.

The presence of such a large number of Jaish commanders, Doval said, was due to desperate measures taken by the ISI a week back, in view of the worldwide condemnation of the Pulwama terror attack.

Sources had told India Today that Pakistan's ISI had shifted Jaish chief Masood Azhar, along with a couple of the commanders, to a safe hideout near Bahawalpur among other places.
