Imran Khan Message To Pakistan After India Hits Jaish-e-Mohammed Camp

New Delhi: Prime Minister of Pakistan Imran Khan held an emergency meeting with top-level Pak officials and Pak army personnel, on Tuesday, in response to the surgical strikes in their country by the India Air Force.

Imran asked the Pakistani armed forces and citizens to be prepared for what is to come, after the surprise attack on Jaish-e-Mohammed terrorist camp by the Indian Air Force, early on Tuesday.

Imran Khan chaired this emergency meeting post the "non-military, pre-emptive air strikes" by IAF. This surgical strike comes after the Pulwama attack on the CRPF personnel carried by terror group Jaish-e-Mohammed. It was reported that they were planning more such attacks in the country.

"The forum concluded that India has committed aggression that was uncalled for, to which Pakistan shall respond at the time and place of its choosing," The Pak PMO added post-meeting of the National Security Committee that included the chiefs of all three armed forces and other officials.

Foreign Secretary Vijay Gokhale said in a statement that Indian Air Force has brought down the biggest camp of the terrorist outfit Jaish-e-Mohammed and a large number of terrorists were eliminated in the bombings.

According to the sources, the number of terrorists killed in the attack by Indian Air Force strike 300 and the attack strike took place at around 3:30 am.

A total of twelve Mirage 2000 fighter jets dropped approximately 1,000 kg bombs on the Balakot camp location.

Pakistan's Foreign Minister Shah Mehmood Qureshi had earlier said: "This was a grave aggression by India against Pakistan. This is a violation of LoC and Pakistan has the right to retaliate in self-defence".

Right after the Pulwama terror attack, Pak PM had said that they are ready to act on the issue if actionable intelligence against the terrorists based in Pakistan is provided. He then warned India that Pakistan would counter India if the latter committed in any misadventure.

Referring to Imran Khan's interest to investigate attack if supplied with proof, India remarked that is a lame excuse.

"It is a well-known fact that Jaish-e-Mohammed and its leader Masood Azhar are based in Pakistan. These should be sufficient proof for Pakistan to take action," the Ministry of External Affairs said. Meanwhile, the Indian government has already taken up the task of briefing major world powers on the second surgical air strike, which took place in the wee hours of Tuesday.

Also Read: Surgical Strike 2: Narendra Modi Calls It A Festive Occasion
