Pakistan vs India allies and enemies: What countries support India? Who supports Pakistan?

India carries out airstrike on Pakistan following Pulwama attack

top stories direct to your inbox SUBSCRIBE Invalid email Sign up to receive our rundown of the day'sdirect to your inbox We use your sign-up to provide content in ways you've consented to and to improve our understanding of you. This may include adverts from us and 3rd parties based on our understanding. You can unsubscribe at any time. More info

Pakistani officials said the airstrikes were carried out a day after Indian warplanes struck inside Pakistan for the first time since a war in 1971. India’s foreign secretary Vijay Gokhale said the Indian air strikes were targeted at a militant camp in Pakistani territory, which was run by Jaish-e-Mohammed (JeM). The attack came after JeM claimed responsibility for a suicide car bomb attack that killed at least 40 Indian paramilitary police on February 14. But Pakistan warned it would retaliate, with Prime Minister Imran Khan and army chief Qamar Javed Bajwa saying in a statement that it "strongly rejected Indian claim of targeting an alleged terrorist camp near Balakot and the claim of heavy casualties." READ MORE: Pakistan CONDEMNS India - Imran Khan vows Pakistan 'SHALL RESPOND' as '300 killed'

What countries support India? If tensions continue to worsen between the two countries, India may have to gain support from its biggest allies. Russia has been a close ally of India since its independence and they are also one of the biggest partners in bilateral trade. USA President Donald Trump is also said to be pro-India due to receiving a lot of funding from Hindus in his campaign for president.

Pakistan vs India allies and enemies: Imran Khan meets China's President Xi Jinping in Beijing

What countries support Pakistan? China is said to be an ally of Pakistan to fulfil its oil needs as well as battle India’s growth as a powerful Asian nation. Pakistan also has Turkey on its side after they were both part of an alliance that was formed by the USA against the Soviet Union.

Saudi Arabia is also a fan of Pakistan being a Sunni Muslim country and the Saudi military is also trained by Pakistan.

Pakistan vs India allies and enemies: The Indian army dwarfs Pakistan's in terms of numbers

Why are there tensions between Pakistan and India? India and Pakistan became independent nations in 1947. But their first war over Kashmir broke out only two months later. In 1971, India supported East Pakistan’s effort to become independent and carried out bombing raise inside Pakistan, before the war ended with Bangladesh being created.

Pakistan vs India allies and enemies: A map shows India is no match for Pakistan's nuclear weapons

Pakistan: Pre-emptive strike 'absolutely necessary' says Gokhale
