'Story being presented is the opposite of reality', says Pakistan while quoting Mehbooba Mufti

Ready to work with new US administration says Pak foreign minister

With a likely meeting of Jaishankar, Qureshi Indo-Pak tensions set to thaw further

No Indo-Pak bi-lateral so far on sidelines of Afghan meet

'Story being presented is the opposite of reality', says Pakistan while quoting Mehbooba Mufti

International

oi-Madhuri Adnal

Islamabad, Feb 26: Pakistan Foreign Minister Shah Mahmood Qureshi said that the story being presented is the opposite of reality while quoting Mehbooba Mufti.

Addressing press conference, Shah Mahmood Qureshi quoted Mehbooba Mufti and said that the story being presented is the opposite of reality. "Voices from within (within India) have started to emanate. The statement by Mehbooba Mufti is before you, that the story being presented is the opposite of reality", ANI tweeted.

Qureshi also earlier said, "The action of IAF puts regional stability and peace at grave risk. Area of strike open. Domestic and international media being taken to site."

'Will take international media to the area of strikes', says Pak foreign minister in denial mode

Former Jammu and Kashmir chief minister Mehboob Mufti on Tueday not wholeheartedly endorsing the strikes stated that both India and Pakistan had came out with their respective versions of the air strikes.

She tweeted "Post pre dawn strikes carried out by IAF, conflicting reports coming in. Official communique by FS claims that terror training camps were bombed while Pak denied this & said that the planes made a hasty retreat after being spotted. Hope objective of both sides has been served."

She also asked Pakistan not to escalate the situation after the Indian Air Force carried out a raid on camps of the terror group Jaish-e-Mohammed across the Line of Control (LoC).

How the IAF strike at Balakot unfolded: All the updates here

Earlier in the day, Indian fighter jets crossed the Pakistani territory and conducted air strikes on terrorist camps, which escalated the ongoing tension between the two neigbours. The Indian aircrafts pounded 1,000kgs of bombs, and the Indian government confirmed this as a successful mission. The airstrikes targeted Jaish camps in Balakot, which was across the Line of Control and deep into Pakistani territory. A Pakistani drone has also been shot down near the Gujarat border.

Pakistan admitted that Indian fighter jets struck Balakot, but claimed that they returned when it scrambled its war planes.

For Breaking News and Instant Updates Allow Notifications

Story first published: Tuesday, February 26, 2019, 19:06 [IST]
