Tension with Pakistan surges after India 'strikes' JeM camps

(MENAFN- Gulf Times) Indian warplanes breached Pakistani airspace yesterday in a move that sent tensions over Jammu and Kashmir spiralling, but Islamabad furiously denied claims the strike destroyed a militant camp and inflicted heavy casualties.

The incursion across the ceasefire line that divides Kashmir between the neighbours came after India threatened retaliation over a February 14 suicide bombing claimed by the Pakistan-based Jaish-e-Mohamed (JeM) group, that killed at least 40 troops in Kashmir.

The escalation triggered international alarm, with China and the European Union both calling for the arch-rivals to show 'restraint.

New Delhi said its jets had hit a JeM training camp and killed 'a very large number of militants training to stage suicide attacks in India.

'In the face of imminent danger, a preemptive strike became absolutely necessary, Indian Foreign Secretary Vijay Gokhale said.

Pakistan said it scrambled its fighters to push back the intruders and denied India's claim of heavy casualties, branding it 'self serving, reckless and fictitious.

Pakistan military spokesman Major General Asif Ghafoor said on Twitter that the Indian jets had crossed the Line of Control that divides Indian- and Pakistani-administered Kashmir and that they had released a 'payload in haste while escaping near Balakot.

He did not say what was meant by a 'payload and images he posted on Twitter appeared to show pieces of metal and displaced soil in a heavily forested area.

India's foreign ministry also said the camp was at Balakot, but gave no further detail and the exact location remained unclear.

Balakot is in Pakistan's northwestern Khyber-Pakhtunkhwa province, a few kilometres outside of Pakistan-administered Kashmir.

Gokhale said 'a very large number of militants were killed in the strikes by French-made Mirage 2000 jets.

The commander of the camp was Maulana Yusuf Azhar, a brother-in-law of JeM leader Masood Azhar, Gokhale said.

A senior Indian government source said that 300 militants had been killed in the strikes and that the warplanes had ventured as far as 80km inside Pakistan.

But no evidence was immediately provided to back up the claims of militant casualties.

Indian television networks reported the airstrikes took place at 3.30am and involved a dozen Mirage fighter planes backed up by Israeli-equipped Airborne Warning and Control Systems (AWACS) aircraft that patrolled on India's side of the border.

A strike inside Pakistani territory would be a serious heightening of the rivalry, analysts said.

The purported attack was India's first use of air strikes against Pakistan since 1971, when the two went to war over Bangladesh's independence.

Prime Minister Narendra Modi and his Pakistan counterpart Imran Khan both summoned emergency meetings of top ministers after the attack.

Modi, who is expected to call an election in April, had threatened a 'jaw-breaking response to the February 14 attack.

But at a rally in Rajasthan yesterday, Modi did not directly mention the strike.

He paid tribute to the military and said: 'I assure the nation that the country is in safe hands.

Other top Indian officials said the strike displayed the country's determination to act against Pakistan - which New Delhi accuses of using militants as proxies against it.

'They say they want India to bleed with a 1,000 cuts. We say that each time you attack us, be certain we will get back at you, harder and stronger, said Minister of State for External Affairs Vijay Kumar Singh, a former army chief.

While India has consistently accused its neighbour of supporting extremist groups, Pakistan has equally vehemently denied any role in attacks in India and its only Muslim-majority state, Kashmir.

This is the biggest crisis between the neighbours since 2016, when Pakistan-based militants attacked an Indian army camp in Kashmir, killing 19 soldiers.

In response, India launched what it called 'surgical strikes in Pakistan-ruled Kashmir.

Pakistan denied the strikes ever took place.

Samir Saran, president of the Observer Research Foundation think tank in New Delhi said the fact that India remained vague over the exact spot it had targeted was a sign that New Delhi did not want an all-out conflict.

'This is to take the pressure off Pakistanis. We are still telling them that we don't want an escalation. Which is why we have said that we have taken a preemptive measure. You don't have to make this into a war, if you don't want to, he said.

MENAFN2602201900670000ID1098177863
