Government Convenes All-Party Meeting on IAF Airstrikes

New Delhi: The union minister for external affairs Sushma Swaraj held an all-party meeting in the wake of the “pre-emptive” air strike by the Indian Air Force (IAF) on a Jaish-e-Mohammed training camp on Tuesday morning.

The meeting which was held at 5 pm in Jawaharlal Nehru Bhawan in Delhi was attended by Congress leader Ghulam Nabi Azad.

Swaraj said that she had called a meeting to brief all political parties about the airstrike and its diplomatic impact on India.

Apart from Swaraj, Union home minister Rajnath Singh, finance minister Arun Jaitley – both members of cabinet committee on security – and Parliamentary affairs minister Vijay Goel attended the meeting from the government’s side.

Swaraj said that leaders from almost all big parties were present in the meeting. Some who attended the briefing included Congress’s Ghulam Nabi Azad, CPI (M)’s Sitaram Yechury, Trinamool Congress’s Derek O’Brien, National Conference’s Omar Abdullah, Biju Janata Dal’s Bhartruhari Mahtab, Nationalist Congress Party’s Praful Patel, Bahujan Samaj Party’s Satish Mishra and BJP ally Ramdas Athawale.

Delhi: Visuals from the all-party meeting called by EAM Sushma Swaraj at Jawaharlal Nehru Bhawan. pic.twitter.com/9FnQ59bFsQ — ANI (@ANI) February 26, 2019

“I am happy that representatives of all parties unanimously congratulated the IAF. They also assured their support to the government in all its actions against terrorism. I am happy that all parties showed their togetherness without discriminating between parties,” the external affairs minister told ANI.

ANI quoted government sources saying that Swaraj informed the party leaders that she spoke to the US secretary of state Michael Pompeo over the Indian air strikes. However, the content of the phone call is not yet known.

Also read: India Says Many ‘Eliminated’ in Strike on Jaish Camp, ‘Grave Aggression’ Says Pakistan

Soon after coming out of the meeting, senior Congress leader Ghulam Nabi Azad told reporters, “We have appreciated the efforts by the forces, they always have our support to end terrorism. Another good thing is that it was a clean operation which specifically targeted terrorists and terror camps.”

India put out a statement in the morning which said that the operation was designed to avoid civilian casualties.

Most opposition parties, earlier, had congratulated the IAF for carrying out a successful operation. The opposition parties’ support can be seen in continuity as even in the last all-party meet, held after the Pulwama attack, they had backed the government to take necessary actions against militant groups across the border.
