The India-Pakistan conflict could ‘escalate to NUCLEAR WAR’ claims Azad Kashmir President

India Pakistan: 'Response will come' says Pakistan Armed Forces

top stories direct to your inbox SUBSCRIBE Invalid email Sign up to receive our rundown of the day'sdirect to your inbox We use your sign-up to provide content in ways you've consented to and to improve our understanding of you. This may include adverts from us and 3rd parties based on our understanding. You can unsubscribe at any time. More info

He argued the UN should step in to broker peace and prevent war, saying it is “the least they can do”. Sardar Masood Khan has led the semi-autonomous Azad Kashmir region in Pakistan since 2016. He added that India is “playing with fire” and accused them of “brutalising the people of Kashmir”.

In an interview with Al-Jazeera Mr Khan said: “I think the UN should step forward and broker peace and prevent a war, it’s the least they can do. “Both states are nuclear armed and any small-scale conflict can potentially escalate to the nuclear threshold. “It has to be averted at all costs.” According to the 2017 SIPRI Yearbook, India had an arsenal of 120-130 nuclear warheads and that number was gradually increasing. READ MORE: India vs Pakistan: How air strikes could provoke WORLD WAR 3

Pakistani Prime Minister Imran Khan and Indian Prime Minister Narendra Modi

President of Pakistan-administered Kashmir, Sardar Masoon Khan

As of 2017, Pakistan possessed 150 nuclear warheads and was allegedly intensifying its production of all types of nuclear weapons. Yesterday, Indian jets flew over Pakistan and claimed to be targeting militant camps in a series of air strikes. Indian foreign secretary Vijay Gokhale claimed a “large number” of militants were killed during these strikes. They were carried out in response to a suicide bombing in Indian-controlled Kashmir which killed at least 40 paramilitary soldiers.

Celebrations after Indian strikes in Pakistan

However, Pakistan claims these militant camps do not exist and posted pictures on Twitter of the alleged site of the bombings. Mr Khan said: “Whenever there is a crisis such as this, we go to the UN Security Council. “It is routine, particularly when there are threats from India. “It’s UNSC’s responsibility to maintain peace. That’s the first destination of any country when there’s a threat to peace and security."

The crater from one of the Indian bombs according to Pakistan’s military
