Sharad Pawar steps in to get Prakash Ambedkar, Raju Shetti on board

Prakash Ambedkar

grand alliance

Bharipa Bahujan Mahasangh

Sharad Pawar

Pawar is expected to meet Shetti (left); he met Ambedkar (right) on Monday

Mahagathbandhan

With NCP supremo entering the deal-negotiation arena, leaders are confident that he can bringand Raju Shetti into theWith the Congress failing to get smaller parties like Prakash Ambedkar’sand Raju Shetti’s Swabhimani Shetkari Sanghtana into the grand alliance, NCP supremohas reached out to the two leaders to negotiate a deal. According to senior Congress leaders, Pawar will talk to Ambedkar and Shetti, “who have both been adamant and unrealistic on seat sharing”, and convey the final formula to the party high command.Senior NCP leaders confirmed that Pawar spoke to Ambedkar on Monday night and said that attempts were still on to forge a “grand alliance” against the BJP in the state. Pawar said the NCP and the Congress will continue their fight against the ideological fountainhead of the ruling BJP, the RSS. He is also expected to talk to Congress president Rahul Gandhi on taking Shetti and his Swabhimani Shetkari Sanghtana into the grand alliance.“Our stand is very clear. We don’t agree with the RSS ideology. What more commitment can one ask for,” Pawar said when asked about Ambedkar’s pre-condition of the Congress coming up with an “agenda” to “rein in the RSS”. Last week, Shetti had also given a 48-hour ultimatum to Congress-NCP to accede to this demand, failing which they will contest the Lok Sabha elections on their own. To join the, Shetti has demanded three Lok Sabha seats – Wardha, Buldhana and Hatkanangale. While Wardha has gone to the Congress share, the Buldhana seat is with the NCP. During the meeting on Monday, Pawar assured Sanghtana members that he will raise the issue of Wardha with Rahul and Buldhana with his party leaders.Shetti has warned that if talks between Pawar and Rahul Gandhi fail, then he will field candidates in nine seats, including Madha from where even Pawar wants to contest. Shetti is also expected to meet state Congress chief Ashok Chavan this week. Though both Shetti and Ambedkar have had multiple rounds of talks with Chavan and other NCP leaders, no solution has been reached as yet.The NCP functionary said Pawar has stepped in only because state Congress leaders have failed to convince the allies. “Pawarshaeb has stepped in only because it would hit the prospects of the grand alliance hard. He is the most senior leader and so he is trying to steer the ship,” he said.Though the Congress and the NCP were earlier ready to give four seats to Ambedkar, he had announced candidates for 12 Lok Sabha seats. Trying to persuade Ambedkar to join the coalition, the Congress was disappointed with his inflexible approach. But with Pawar stepping in as the anchor, leaders are confident that both Ambedkar and Shetti will soon come on board.On its own, the Sanghtana has limited influence, but Shetti’s pan-India image as an aggressive farmers’ leader will play a role in consolidating the anti-government farmers’ vote in Congress-NCP’s favour, leaders said. Shetti won Hatkanangale seat in Kolhapur district by cornering 53 per cent votes in 2014.
