Pakistan remains a terror haven, IAF airstrike was not military action: Sushma Swaraj in China

External Affairs Minister Sushma Swaraj on Wednesday raised the February 14 Pulwama suicide attack in the 16th Foreign Ministers Meeting of Russia-India-China (RIC) and said that Pakistan remains a terror haven. She also said that the airstrike in Pakistan, in light of the terror attack, was not a military action.

"It wasn't a military operation, no military installation were targetted. The objective was to act against terrorist infrastructure of JeM to preempt another terror attack in India. India doesn't wish to see further escalation of situation. It'll continue to act with responsibility and restraint," she said.

India kills 2 terrorists with Jaish links in Shopian day after pounding Pakistan camp | LIVE updates

Sushma Swaraj's visit comes in the wake of growing tension between India and Pakistan after Indian Air Force (IAF) carried out airstrike on a Jaish-e-Mohammed (JeM) terror camp in Pakistan's Balakot town in a pre-dawn operation and destroyed it.

Sushma Swaraj, in her opening remarks at the 16th Foreign Ministers Meeting of Russia-India-China (RIC), said, "I am visiting China at a time when there is grief and anger in India. It is the worst terrorist attack directed against our security forces in Jammu and Kashmir."

"The attack was carried out by Jaish-e-Muhammed, the Pakistan-based and supported terrorist organisation," she said, adding, "We have zero tolerance towards terrorism. The Pulwama terror attack was gruesome."

EAM Sushma Swaraj: Following the Pulwama terrorist attack instead of taking seriously the calls by international community to act against Jaish-e-Mohammed&other terror groups based in Pakistan, it denied any knowledge of the attack&outrightly dismissed claims by Jaish-e-Mohammed. pic.twitter.com/dBW8Ci3uli ANI (@ANI) February 27, 2019

EAM: We're aware of the recent dastardly terrorist attack on our security forces in Pulwama, J&K perpetrated by Jaish-e-Mohammed, a Pakistan based&supported terrorist org proscribed by UN&other countries. We lost over CRPF 40 personnel while several others are injured seriously. pic.twitter.com/4k2GudVzkq ANI (@ANI) February 27, 2019





She further said that the Indian intelligence had credible information that the JeM was planning other attacks in parts of India. "In light of the information, the government of India decided to take preemptive action and target was selected in order to avoid civilian casualties."

A total of 40 CRPF personnel were killed in a suicide attack by Pakistan-based JeM terror organisation in Jammu and Kashmir's Pulwama district on February 14, sparking outrage in the country.

Days after the Pulwama suicide attack, India breached the Line of Control (LoC) and carried out airstrikes at JeM's biggest training camp in Balakot in Pakistan's restive Khyber Pakhtunkhwa province, about 80-km from the Line of Control (LoC) early Tuesday. The airstrike killed a "very large number" of terrorists, trainers and senior commanders.

Also Read | Exclusive: Why Balakot was chosen for IAF airstrike

Also Read | Mumbai on high alert after IAF airstrike, govt asks schools to exercise caution

Also Watch | IAF airstrike was not military action, says Sushma Swaraj in China
