"New India Will Not Spare Any Acts Of Terror": BJP President Amit Shah Salutes The Valour Of Forces, Gives Out A Stern Message To Perpetrators Of Terror After India Strikes Pak's Terror Camps

BJP president Amit Shah on Tuesday hailed India Air Forces' pre-emptive strikes on Pak based terror outfit Jaish-e-Mohammed's 3 terror camps across LoC. Hours after a dozen IAF jets pounded terror camps across LoC, India confirmed the action, saying it had targeted the biggest training camp of Jaish-e-Mohammad, the terror group involved that claimed responsibility for the February 14 attack on a CRPF convoy in which 40 jawans were martyred.

BJP president took to Twitter to congratulate and salute the bravery and valour of our armed forces.

I congratulate and salute the bravery and valour of our armed forces.

Today’s action further demonstrates that India is safe and secure under the strong & decisive leadership of PM @narendramodi. — Amit Shah (@AmitShah) February 26, 2019

Furthermore, he stated that "Our New India will not spare any acts of terror and their perpetrators and patrons."

Today's strong action shows the will and resolve of a New India.

Our New India will not spare any acts of terror and their perpetrators and patrons. — Amit Shah (@AmitShah) February 26, 2019

Read: India Strikes Pakistan: PM Modi Supervised Operation; Was In Situation Room At South Block As IAF Decimated Jaish Terror Camps Across LoC, Confirm Top Sources To Republic TV

Earlier, the top sources have told Republic TV that Prime Minister Modi supervised the operation as he was present in the situation room at South block during the strike. Here are the full details of how the IAF prepared and carried out the pre-dawn strike crushing Pak terror camps to the pulp, as per top sources:

Raksha Mantri was presented with multiple retaliatory options

Air Chief Marshal BS Dhanya drew up the plan for retaliatory air strikes

Indian Army and Air Force stepped up the air surveillance along the LoC.

Drones were also used for the surveillance

Target spots were selected around Feb 20-21

Two Mirage squadrons with 12 jets were designated for the mission

Early warning jet of Embraer platform and mid-air refueller did a trial run

12 Mirage 2000s, equipped with laser-guided bombs, take off in batches

They fly at a low-level across LoC near Muzaffarabad

The laser pods were used to pinpoint targets

Read: Mirage 2000: All You Need To Know About The Beauty That Destroyed Pak Terror Camps

The reported strike comes days after the Pulwama attack, where 40 CRPF personnel were killed. Pakistan-based terror outfit JeM had claimed responsibility for the attack. The incident has escalated tensions between the two neighbours, with New Delhi vowing to take stern action against Islamabad.
