Sindh Assembly warns India to have ‘mercy on their 1.27b people’

The Sindh Assembly condemned the Indian aggression and violation of the Line of Control (LOC) and warned them not to play with fire and have "mercy on their 1.27 billion people". A joint resolution moved by lawmakers from different political parties including Pakistan Peoples Party (PPP), Muttahida Qaumi Movement-Pakistan (MQM-P), Pakistan Tehreek-e-Insaf (PTI) and Grand Democratic Alliance (GDA) lauded the timely and effective response of Pakistan Air Force (PAF) and said that the house stood united with the fearless armed forces working tirelessly day and night to safeguard our motherland.As the session began on Tuesday, Agha Siraj Durrani started the proceedings by condemning the Indian attack and calling it a "cowardly act". The lawmakers from the treasury and opposition also spoke saying that the nation stood with the army to defend the country.PPP senior leader Syed Qaim Ali Shah, referring to the 1965 war with India said, "War is not fought with merely guns, but passion and sacrifices are needed to win it." He added that the Pakistani forces, even having limited resources and strength, have taught a lesson to India. "Pakistan military, as compared to 1965, is now more powerful and equipped with latest technology to defeat the enemy," he said.Leader of the opposition Firdous Shamim Naqvi said, "We will give quick responses and India will be puzzled over it."Hindu MPAs in the assembly vowed to defend Pakistan and announced that they were ready to fight on the front line against India. "I am ready to go on border with our Hur Force to save our motherland, Pakistan," Nand Kumar Goklani of GDA said adding, "Pir Pagara Shah Mardan fought the war against India in 1965 and 1971 securing the border linking Sindh and Rajasthan and Hur Forces are once again ready for it." Reiterating his commitment, he said, "The white colour in our flag reflects minorities' representation in the country."Mangla Sharma of MQM-P said, "Pakistan and India are atomic powers, but the latter has always been aggressive." She advised the Indian Prime Minister Narendra Modi to avoid pushing this region into war and give up the 'warmongering policy'. "This drama is being staged by him to win the elections in India," she said.

Muttahida Majlis-e-Amal MPA Abdul Rasheed said, "No one can defeat Pakistan Army that fights war with the 'commitment of jihad'. He suggested the federal government to summon a national conference inviting armed forces and parliamentary leaders to take them into confidence and brief them about the prevailing situation. He, however, appreciated the prime minister's decision to give India a response for its aggression.

Jamal Siddiqui of PTI expressed the view that the federal government, armed forces and entire nation is on one page against India and they will be given a historic defeat in its nefarious designs. "I am ready to go at border to accompany our forces and to fight against enemy," he remarked.Haleem Adil Shaikh of PTI, Marvi Rashdi and Munwar Wassan of PPP, Nusrat Seher Abbasi of GDA and others also condemned the aggression.Published in The Express Tribune, February 27, 2019.
