Pakistan 'considers NUCLEAR strike' on India after jets shot down and airspace SHUT

Something went wrong, please try again later.

Don't miss a thing by getting the Daily Star's biggest headlines straight to your inbox!

The two nuclear-armed countries are at risk of descending into conflict after both ordered warplanes to carry out airstrikes in revenge attacks in recent days.

Pakistan carried out airstrikes and shot down two Indian jets on Wednesday, officials said, a day after Indian warplanes struck inside Pakistan for the first time since a war in 1971.

Pakistan Prime Minister Imran Khan is due to convene an emergency meeting of his nuclear weapons command authority on Wednesday to consider his options.

“You all know what that means,” a government spokesman said of the meeting.

Meanwhile, both countries have shut down their airspace for commercial airlines amid heightened tensions.

Indian airlines cancelled service to least six cities in northern India and several airports were closed while Pakistan Civil Aviation Authority (CAA) has closed its airspace completely.

(Image: DS)

(Image: NC) (Image: TWITTER)

In a televised address to the nation, Khan called for talks with India and hoped "better sense" would prevail so that both sides could de-escalate.

"History tells us that wars are full of miscalculation,” he said.

“My question is that given the weapons we have can we afford miscalculation. We should sit down and talk."

India’s Prime Minister, Narendra Modi, is yet to comment on the counter-attack by Pakistan, but said “the nation is in safe hands” addressing a public rally in Churu, Rajasthan, on Monday.

(Image: GETTY) (Image: GETTY)

Tensions have been elevated since a suicide car bombing by Pakistan-based militants in Indian-controlled Kashmir killed at least 40 Indian paramilitary police on February 14.

India claimed it had bombed “terror camps” in near Kashmir's Line of Control (LoC), where the militant group, the Jaish-e-Mohammed (JeM), were said to be planning another attack.

Pakistan Air Force fighter jets were scrambled to intercept the Indian warplanes, causing them to hastily release their payloads, resulting in conflicting reports of casualties and damage.

The strike – first of its kind since the two countries went to war in 1971 – has risen the risk of war dramatically.

Pakistan Major General Asif Ghafoor said he country had "no choice" but to respond to India's attack after earlier warning "get ready for our surprise”.

(Image: GETTY) (Image: GETTY)

Indian air force planes were shot down after straying into Pakistani airspace on Wednesday after Pakistan carried out airstrikes in Indian-occupied Kashmir.

"This was not a retaliation in true sense, but to tell Pakistan has capability, we can do it, but we want to be responsible, we don't want an escalation, we don't want a war," Ghafoor told a news conference.

One of the aircraft fell on India's side of Kashmir, while the second came down in Pakistani-held territory and its pilot was captured, he added. In a statement, Pakistan's foreign ministry said it had hit a "non-military" target inside Indian-controlled Kashmir, but that it had avoided human loss and collateral damage.

(Image: REUTERS)

"If India is striking at so called terrorist backers without a shred of evidence, we also retain reciprocal rights to retaliate against elements that enjoy Indian patronage while carrying out acts of terror in Pakistan," the statement said.

On Tuesday evening, Pakistan began shelling using heavy calibre weapons in 12 to 15 places along the de facto border in Kashmir, a spokesman for the Indian defence forces said. "The Indian Army retaliated for effect and our focused fire resulted in severe destruction to five posts and number of casualties," the spokesman said. Five Indian soldiers suffered minor wounds in the shelling that ended on Wednesday morning, he added.

(Image: GETTY)

Pakistan and India have fought three wars since independence from British colonial rule in 1947 and went to the brink a fourth in 2002 after a Pakistani militant attack on India's parliament. In Mumbai, India's financial capital, there was a visible increase in security levels for a city that has suffered numerous militant attacks in the past. US Secretary of State Mike Pompeo spoke separately with the foreign ministers of India and Pakistan and urged them to avoid "further military activity" following Tuesday's air strike.
