India launches ‘airstrikes’ in KP Balakot; Pak vows to retaliate

India launches ‘airstrikes’ in KP Balakot; Pak vows to retaliate

# Contradictions galore # Indian envoy summoned

NEW DELHI/ ISLAMABAD, Feb 26 (Agencies): In the most serious escalation in hostilities between the two nuclear-armed neighbours in two decades, India launched an airstrike on a target within Pakistan in the wee hours this morning.

Indian fighter jets crossed the Line of Control, the unofficial border that divides Kashmir between India and Pakistan, and hit a target that India said was a training camp used by Jaish-e-Muhammad, a Pakistan-based militant group that is designated as a terrorist organization by India.

Jaish-e-Muhammad claimed responsibility for an attack on February 14 last that killed 49 Indian paramilitary police in Kashmir. The attack was the deadliest in three decades of insurgency against Indian rule, and Indian Prime Minister Narendra Modi had vowed to respond.

As tensions flared, the two countries presented vastly differing pictures of what occurred in Tuesday’s strike.

India’s foreign secretary, Vijay Gokhale, told reporters that the strike caused a “large number” of casualties at a Jaish-e-Muhammad training camp. He said the strike was based on “credible intelligence” that the group was planning further attacks.

In a brief, prepared statement, Indian foreign secretary Vijay Gokhale said at 11:30 am that the Indian target was Jaish-e-Muhammad training camp at “Balakot”.

He described the strike as “non-military pre-emptive action” against the Jaish in the face of “credible intelligence” that the group was preparing more fidayeen for terrorist strikes in India.

He did not refer to the Indian Air Force or use the term air strike, describing what had happened merely as “an intelligence led operation” against a key Jaish facility. He did not refer to the location struck as being in “Pakistan” or Pakistan Administered Kashmir (PAK) though he did say “information regarding the location of training camps in Pakistan and PAK has been provided to Pakistan from time to time.”

According to the Indian foreign secretary, “in this operation, a very large number of JeM terrorists, trainers, senior commanders and groups of jihadis who were being trained for fidayeen action were eliminated.”

In a statement, Foreign Secretary Vijay Gokhale said India struck the biggest training camp of JeM in Balakot and that a very large number of JeM terrorists, trainers, senior commanders and groups of jihadis who were being trained for fidayeen action were eliminated.

"This facility at Balakot was headed by Maulana Yosuf Azhar alias Ustad Ghouri, the brother-in-law of Masood Azhar, chief of JeM," he said.

Though there is no official confirmation, sources indicated that Yosuf Azhar was killed in the strike along with 350 other terrorists. He is understood to be involved in the hijacking of the Indian Airlines flight IC-814 in December 1999. "The Government of India is firmly and resolutely committed to taking all necessary measures to fight the menace of terrorism. Hence this non-military preemptive action was specifically targeted at the JeM camp," said Gokhale.

"The selection of the target was also conditioned by our desire to avoid civilian casualties. The facility is located in a thick forest on a hilltop far away from any civilian presence," he added.

While officially no figures of casualties have been given, Indian media channels were reporting as many as “300 terrorists” killed. The basis and authenticity of the reports remains unverified.

According to Asif Ghafoor, a spokesman for Pakistan’s armed forces, the Indian fighter jets released their “payload in haste while escaping” from Pakistani aircraft and caused no casualties or damage. He later posted a photo of what he said was debris from the strike, saying the bombs fell “in the open.”

The news of the early morning action in the skies above Pakistan was first broken, almost in real time, by the Pakistani side at 5.12 AM IST with a tweet by its military spokesperson, Maj General Asif Ghafoor.

He said, “Indian Air Force violated Line of Control. Pakistan Air Force immediately scrambled. Indian aircrafts gone back. Details to follow.”

His next tweet, at 7.06 AM, said the intrusion occurred in the “Muzaffarabad sector”. He identified “Balakot” as the place where the IAF jets dropped their “payload”, i.e. bombs, when they were met with “a timely and effective response” from the Pakistani Air Force.

Finally, after posting pictures of damage by ordnance in an undefined wooded area, Maj Gen Ghafoor tweeted at 9:59 am that the intrusion by the IAF “within AJK (Pakistan Administered Kashmir) was 3-4 miles”.

However, later reports revealed that action had taken place in Balakot in Khyber-Pukhtoonkhwa in north-east Pakistan.

According to a report in the Washington Post, “The strike took place near the town of Balakot, just inside the Pakistani province of Khyber-Pakhtunkhwa and not in the disputed Kashmir region. Initial reports from local police officials and residents who spoke on the condition of anonymity confirmed that a strike took place in a mountainous area a few miles outside town, but they said they saw no signs of mass casualties.”

According to a BBC report, residents in several towns near Balakot (Khyber-Pakhtoonkhw) reported hearing explosions early on Tuesday. Mohammad Adil, a farmer in Jaba village said that he and his family were woken at about 03:00 by "a huge explosion", the report said. It quoted Adil as saying, “Then we heard jets flying over. We went to the place in the morning. There was a huge crater and four or five houses were damaged," he said.

The Reuters gave a more detailed report of the damages in Balakot. It said that villagers near the town of Balakot in northeast Pakistan were shaken out of their sleep by what seemed like an earthquake in the early hours of Tuesday, only discovering once dawn broke that there had been an Indian airstrike on their neighbourhood.

It quoted villagers as saying that only one person was wounded in the attack and they knew of no fatalities.

A resident, who did not want to give his name, said there was a nearby madrasa run by Jaish, though most villagers were guarded talking about their militant neighbours, the report mentioned. “There is this madrasa on the hilltop. The Jaish-e-Mohammed runs it,” he said.

It quoted another person as saying that the militants had had a presence in the area for years.

“I belong to that area. I know for sure that there has been a training camp. It used to be there. I know Jaish people ran it,” he said.

“This camp was turned into a madrasa several years ago, but no one would still be allowed to get close to this infrastructure. There are scores of students in the madrasa at any given time,” he said, according to the report.

Set in a wooded, hilly area in Khyber Pakhtunkhwa province on the way to the scenic Kaghan valley, some 40 kilometres from the de facto border with India, Balakot was of many towns that was devastated by a massive earthquake in 2005. From what villagers could see, the Indian attack had missed its target as the bombs dropped exploded about a kilometre away from the madrasa.

Mohammad Ajmal, a 25 year-old villager near Jaba Top, where the attack took place, said he had heard four loud bangs in succession just before 3.00 a.m. “We couldn’t tell what had happened. It was only in the morning that we figured out it was an attack,” he told Reuters after visiting the site, in a wooded hilltop area. “We saw fallen trees and one damaged house, and four craters where the bombs had fallen.”

Fida Hussain Shah, a 46 year-old farmer, said he and other villagers had found pieces of Indian ordnance that had splintered pine trees on the hill but the only casualty was a man sleeping in his house when shrapnel broke the windows, the report said.

Meanwhile, Indian Prime Minister Narendra Modi did not directly mention the air strikes when he addressed a political rally in Rajasthan later on Tuesday but he told cheering crowds: "I understand your enthusiasm and your energy. Today is a day we bow before our heroes."

India is due to hold elections by the end of May.

Pakistani Prime Minister Imran Khan later convened an urgent meeting of national security chiefs and condemned "irresponsible Indian policy".

"Once again [the] Indian government has resorted to a self-serving, reckless and fictitious claim," a statement issued after the meeting said. "This action has been done for domestic consumption, being in an election environment, putting regional peace and stability at grave risk."

The Pakistan government called a joint session of parliament for Wednesday to give a unified response to the "violation" of the line of control.

Khan has also summoned a special meeting of the National Command Authority (NCA) - the body that oversees Pakistan's nuclear arsenal - to take place on Wednesday, officials said.

In his first statement to the Pakistani media, Pakistani foreign minister Shah Mahmood Qureshi called the Indian action “grave aggression”.

He also said that Pakistan had the right to self-defence and that Prime Minister Imran Khan had called for a meeting to discuss the situation.

The National Security Council meeting chaired by Khan declared that “India has committed uncalled aggression to which Pakistan shall respond at the time and place of its choosing”.

A meeting of the National Command Authority in Pakistan has been called – this is the apex body which exercises command and control over the country’s nuclear stockpile – as has a joint sitting of the Pakistani Senate and National Assembly.

Pakistani analyst, Mosharraf Zaidi, saw the choice of Balakot in KPK as meaning India “has attacked Pakistan”. In a tweet, he said, “Just to be clear: #Balakot is not in Azad Kashmir. If Indian Air Force planes dropped payload in Balakot, they crossed across the LOC, and then across the entirety of Azad Kashmir, and then into Khyber Pakhtukhwa. India didn't "cross the LOC. It has attacked Pakistan.”
