Is it safe to travel to India & Pakistan as threat of nuclear war rises? Flights cancelled

We use your sign-up to provide content in ways you've consented to and to improve our understanding of you. This may include adverts from us and 3rd parties based on our understanding. You can unsubscribe at any time. More info

Discover the best city breaks, beach holidays, cruises and UK travel spots by signing up

India and Pakistan have both cancelled flights after two Indian jets were shot down after they crossed into Pakistan airspace. The incident comes days after an Indian air strike on a militant camp which Delhi claimed had killed 300 people. Seven cities in India, including Delhi and Mumbai, have now been put on “highest alert” for possible terror attacks. This is the latest travel advice for those travelling to, or intending to travel to, India and Pakistan.

India and Pakistan holidays: Is it safe to travel as threat of war rises - latest travel advice

How safe is it to travel to India and Pakistan?

The UK Foreign and Commonwealth Office have not yet updated their travel advice to India and Pakistan but both countries come with ongoing travel restriction warnings.

Terrorists are “very likely” to carry out attacks in both India and Pakistan.

India

For India, the FCO advise against all travel to “the immediate vicinity of the border with Pakistan, other than at Wagah.”

They also advise against all travel to “Jammu and Kashmir, with the exception of (i) travel within the city of Jammu, (ii) travel by air to the city of Jammu, and (iii) travel within the region of Ladakh, Manipur, except the state capital Imphal, where the FCO advise against all but essential travel.”

As for India, the FCO said: “There may be an increased threat to places visited by British nationals such as religious sites, markets, festival venues and beaches.

“You should be vigilant at this time, monitor local media and take all precautions for your safety. Visitors to India should avoid protests and large gatherings.”

They added: “Over 940,000 British nationals visited India in 2017. Most visits are trouble-free.”
