Evening Standard comment: Will it take Trump to keep the peace in Asia?; Fighting for fairer fares

A ll eyes are on Asia. In one part of the continent, Vietnam, Donald Trump and Kim Jong-un are meeting to try and remove the nuclear threat from the Korean peninsula. At the same time, in another part, there has been a dramatic escalation of tension between the two nuclear-armed powers of India and Pakistan.

Whatever you think of the character of Mr Trump — and his own former lawyer Michael Cohen today will testify that he is “a racist, a conman and a cheat” — everyone should want the American President to succeed.

The threat of North Korean long-range nuclear weapons is one of the greatest risks to world peace. Bringing its dictator to the negotiating table, even if it involves giving him a publicity coup, is an achievement.

If Barack Obama had pulled it off, we would be applauding him.

We now also need the White House’s speedy intervention to prevent the clashes over Kashmir getting dangerously out of hand.

Today Pakistan claims it has shot down two Indian jets over its territory.

This was because India was apparently retaliating against the Pakistani retaliation that followed the Indian raid on Pakistan-based militants earlier this week, which itself was a retaliation after a bloody terrorist attack by those militants in India last month. Did you follow all that?

To add petrol to the flames, India is facing a looming election and passions are running high.

The claims and counter-claims are not the real issue. The problem is that neither of these huge, populous nations has found a stable way of living next to each other.

India believes with some force that elements of the Pakistan state give succour to terrorism. Pakistan believes, with some force, that India’s huge army exists to threaten it with invasion.

Both have acquired nuclear weapons which they aim at each other but lack the complex protocols and hotlines that emerged to prevent tragic miscalculation between the US and the Soviet Union during the Cold War.

We would hope that the rest of the world could broker a détente. But Britain, despite its ties to the subcontinent and large diaspora, is paralysed and diminished by Brexit; the EU lacks a robust foreign policy; Russia is a mischief maker; and China is not yet a mature enough player on the global stage to be a peace broker.

So it falls, once again, to the United States to be the world’s policeman.

You may not want to hear it, but we need Donald Trump.

Fighting for fairer fares

“Only car dealers are more distrusted by consumers” than train companies, the head of the Government’s rail review has just told the industry.

In a key speech this week Keith Williams spelled out some tough truths: using trains “often baffles and sometimes alienates”. He’s right, and today we expose one reason why.

Train companies appear to be hiding cheap fares so that thousands of passengers travelling into and out of London are having to pay twice for parts of their journeys.

Now travellers are fighting back, launching a joint court action — the first of its kind — against rail operators on two of the biggest networks running south from the capital. They are claiming around £93 million in damages.

The courts will decide the case but it’s good to see passengers standing up to the system. Their claim is that people who already hold travelcards shouldn’t have to pay again for parts of longer journeys into central London.

It ought to be simple to resolve since train companies already agree: there are special tickets to allow this on offer but try buying one online or at a machine and you’ll find that it’s impossible.

You have to go to a ticket office — if there is one open — and ask, assuming, that is, you know about the lower fare in the first place, since train companies don’t tell you about them.

The case involves operators on two networks running south from London. But the point goes beyond them.

Railways should put passengers first, but it doesn’t feel like that when you travel. Complex rules seem designed to catch people out. No one knows if they are getting the best deal.

Mr Williams promises his review can change that: but for now it’s the courts which will decide whether the system has been charging too much.
