It’s a bandh day for India

Eastern Mirror Desk

Dimapur, Jan. 7:

NESO strike from 5 am to 4 pm

Bharat bandh on Jan. 8 and 9 th

Karbi Anglong bandh from 5 am to 5 pm

No postal service on Jan. 8 and 9th

It is bandh galore today with at least four different groups having called for strike over various issues. As a result, business activities across the nation could come to a standstill and normal life of the people hit hard.

In a rare coincidence, four groups — North East Students Organisation (NESO), Central Trade Unions (CTUs), All India Postal Employees’ Union, and a conglomeration of organisations in Assam – have called for separate bandhs on Jan. 8 (on 9th too for some unions) for different reasons. It is likely to throw life out of gear.

Northeast will be affected the most on Tuesday as it will witness two region-based protests besides the nation-wide agitations called by other organisations.

Protest against Citizenship (Amendment) Bill, 2016

The North East Students Organisation (NESO) and 30 other groups from Northeast have announced a complete shut-down in the region on Tuesday from 5 am to 4 pm to protest the move of the central government to pass the controversial Citizenship (Amendment) Bill 2016. Several organisations in the region fear that the Bill would facilitate influx of illegal immigrants which will affect the future of the indigenous people in Northeast.

The Naga Students’ Federation (NSF), the apex student body of the Nagas, and its sub-units have informed that it would participate in the strike. It has appealed all the civil society, business community and the general public to co-operate with the bandh.

It may be mentioned that under the Citizenship (Amendment) Bill, 2016, people belonging to minority communities — Hindus, Sikhs, Buddhists, Jains, Parsis and Christians — from Afghanistan, Bangladesh and Pakistan will be eligible to apply for Indian citizenship after six years of stay in the country.

Bharat bandh begins

About 20 crore workers are expected to join the 48-hour bharat bandh called by 10 Central Trade Unions (CTUs) to protest against the alleged “anti-worker policies” adopted by the BJP-led government. Farmers under the aegis of the Left Peasant Wings will join the two-day strike that begins on Tuesday. It is likely to affect business activities and public transport like rail and road across the country.

A section of public sector unit bank employees will join the strike called by the CTUs. The All India Bank Employees Association (AIBEA) and Bank Employees Federation of India have informed the Indian Banks’ Association (IBA) about its support for the nation-wide protest. So, most banks will remain closed till Wednesday. It is reported the State Bank of India is likely to remain operational during the bandh but it is not confirmed at the time of filing this report.

No postal service for two days

The All India Postal Employees’ Union is joining the rest of the country in the two-day nation-wide strike on Jan. 8 and 9th called by the Confederation of Central Government Employees and National Federation of Postal Employees in support of its 23-point charter of demands. The Nagaland division of the union has informed in a statement that all public transactions in the post offices across the state will remain closed during the strike.

Karbi Anglong strike

More than 24 organisations have called for a 12-hour Karbi Anglong bandh on Jan. 8 from 5 am to 5 pm to protest against the alleged illegal Town committee election and the bogus voter list. The groups have demanded Chief Executive Member (CEM) of Karbi Anglong Autonomous Council (KAAC), Tuliram Ronghang to frame the rules and acts of the council before the Town Committee election which is scheduled to take place on Jan. 8.

What will be closed in Nagaland

All educational institutions to remain closed. President of All Nagaland Private Schools Association Andrew Ahoto said most CBSE schools will reopen by the second week of January, while NBSE schools will open by the end of the month. Even the schools that are supposed to reopen on Tuesday have deferred to Jan. 9.

Nagaland State Transport (NST) buses to stay off the road. NST assistant general manager Thomas informed Eastern Mirror that the bus service will resume after 4 pm on Tuesday.

Taxis and autorickshaws will stay off the road. However, the general secretary of Dimapur District Auto Drivers Union informed that services will resume after 4 pm.

Deputy Commissioner Sushil Kumar Patel said its office in Dimapur will remain open to ensure law and order is maintained in the city.

Reliable sources said that government offices will remain open but non-availability of public transport system could affect the operation.

What will be exempted in Nagaland
