MEA summons Pakistan Deputy High Commissioner, says 'IAF pilot must be returned'

Pakistan Deputy High Commissioner Syed Haidar Shah at South Block after MEA summoned him on Wednesday | Photo Credit: ANI

New Delhi: Amid escalating tensions between India and Pakistan, the Ministry of External Affairs on Wednesday summoned Pakistan Deputy High Commissioner Syed Haidar Shah. The development comes after Pakistan claimed that it had captured an Indian Air Force (IAF) pilot. In a press conference today, the government confirmed that one IAF pilot was “missing in action” and that a MiG 21 plane was “lost” after IAF jets thwarted Pakistan Air Force’s attempt to violate the Indian airspace in the early hours of Wednesday.

As per sources, the MEA has reportedly read the Riot Act to the Pakistan envoy and said that the IAF pilot ‘must be returned’ to India. The MEA also pointed out to Pakistan’s Deputy High Commissioner that Pakistan Air Force had ‘tried to hit military target’ after violating the Indian airspace in Nowshera sector of Jammu and Kashmir earlier today.

Pakistan Deputy High Commissioner Syed Haider Shah summoned by MEA.



More details by @PadmajaJoshi in conversation with @Srinjoy_C | #PakTaughtLesson. pic.twitter.com/yv2SgwO0Ty — TIMES NOW (@TimesNow) February 27, 2019

Sources said that the MEA pointed out to the Pakistan envoy that the IAF jets had only targeted terrorist camps in Balakot in Khyber Pakhtunkhwa region in the neighbouring country, during the air strikes conducted on Tuesday. IAF air strike in Pakistan LIVE UPDATES

All issues, including the Pulwama attack and the missing IAF pilot, were raised during the meeting with the Pakistan envoy, sources said. The MEA also reportedly told the envoy that Pakistan was involved in supporting terrorism.

Delhi: Pakistan Deputy High Commissioner Syed Haider Shah at South Block. He had been summoned by Ministry of External Affairs. pic.twitter.com/ZZEb0tAQ8z — ANI (@ANI) February 27, 2019

Earlier today, Ministry of External Affairs spokesperson Raveesh Kumar confirmed that Pakistan had attempted to breach Indian airspace and target military installations but its plan was thwarted by the IAF successfully.

Kumar said that during Indian retaliation, one Pakistan Air Force fighter plane was shot down by a MiG 21 Bison of the Indian Air Force. However, in the engagement, IAF also lost one MiG 21 and one pilot was "missing in action". The MEA spokesperson said that they were ascertaining Pakistan's claim that the pilot was in its custody.

The move by Pakistan Air Force comes a day after 12 Mirage 2000 aircrafts of the IAF crossed the Line of Control (LoC) and bombed a Jaish-e-Mohammad training camp in Pakistan’s Balakot, killing at least 350 terrorists.
