Community org., students declare strike across Nagaland

Dimapur, Jan. 7 (EMN): Major community and students’ organisations in Nagaland have declared a general strike across the state in response to the call of the North East Students Organisation (Neso) against the Indian government’s Citizenship (Amendment) Bill of 2016.

Various community organisations; and student organsiations under the aegis of the Naga Students’ Federation (NSF), issued separate statements on Monday denouncing the Indian government’s bid to pass the controversial bill.

Nagaland Tribes Council calls out BJP for double-speak

The recently formed Joint Committee on Prevention of Illegal Immigrants (JCPI) of the Nagaland Tribes Council (NTC) has sounded a clarion to the people of Nagaland to take a stand against the bill. The JCPI is a conglomeration of Naga civil society organizations tasked with pursuing with the Nagaland state government to formulate policies and measures to protect the state from illegal immigrants/immigration.

The committee issued a press release on Monday declaring full support to the Neso’s call for Northeast-wide strike on the 8th.

“The JCPI fully stands for the interest of the indigenous people, especially in the Northeast. However, the unwavering attitude of the BJP central government and the recent announcement of the PM Modi to go ahead with the passage of the Citizenship (Amendment) Bill, 2016, in the parliament have hurt the sentiments of the Northeast people,” the statement read.

‘For decades the entire Northeast has been the dumping ground of foreigners and illegal immigrants changing the demographic structure of the entire region; so when the BJP promised to eradicate the menace of illegal immigration, there was a sense of hope and elation.’

However, the committee stated, the “double-speak” of the BJP government has shocked even its most ardent supporters in the region where instead of tackling illegal immigration, the central government is prepared to flood the region with non-indigenous populations on the basis of religion. This is against the secular fabric of the country, a serious offence against the region “because such a diabolical policy will guarantee the demise of indigenous communities in the region in the years to come,’ the committee stated.

The JCPI also expressed shock that the Union Cabinet approved the controversial bill on Jan. 7 despite being fully aware that the entire Northeast was on a warpath.

“This is nothing but contempt for the entire Northeast region. The JCPI is also shocked at the indifferent attitude of the Naga state government despite being fully aware of the impending threat upon the indigenous populations,’ the statement read.

The JCPI has conveyed appreciation to the Neso for taking the lead to speak for the Northeast people; and to the NSF, for mobilizing the state of Nagaland in support of the agitation.

Dimapur Naga Students’ Union

The high power committee (HPC) of the Dimapur Naga Students’ Union (DNSU) with the constituent units of DNSU will enforce the strike in Dimapur from 5:00 am to 4:00 pm. The committee issued a note on Monday supporting the decision of the North East Students Organisation (NESO) against the proposed Citizenship Amendment Bill 2016, which the committee called “anti tribal people.”

“While appealing all right thinking citizens to extend cooperation in this sudden call, to register our protest against proposed bill, appeal to all the educational institutions, business establishments to shut for the day,” the note stated.

The strike will be total. However, in Dimapur these are exempted from the purview of the strike: Press reporters, medical services, magistrate-on-duty; police, paramilitary; attendees of wedding, conventions/conferences (must produce cards and program copies); travellers are also to posses tickets’ “to avoid any inconveniences,” the committee stated.

Angami Students’ Union

The Angami Students’ Union has also announced the strike for Kohima district. The union issued a note on Monday.

“The Angami Students’ Union under the aegis of the NSF strongly condemn the government of India move on the Citizenship (Amendment) Bill 2016 and its detrimental effect if the bill is passed, which seek to give citizenships to illegal migrants on religious preference,” the union stated.

The union will impose a total ‘bandh,’ as called by the Neso, within its jurisdiction on the 8th from 5:00 am to 4: 00 pm.

The union has appealed to government offices, schools, colleges, business establishment to close on that day. The organisation appealed also to the public to cooperate with the strike.

Diphupar Naga Students’ Union

The Diphupar Naga Students’ Union (DNSU) has announced that it will enforce the 11-hour strike on January 8, from 5 am to 4 pm along National Highway 29 within the Diphupar jurisdiction, in Dimapur. A press release from the organisation on Monday called the proposed bill “dubious.”

The strike will affect regular traffic both private and government vehicles. All business establishments and institutions within the Diphupar jurisdiction are asked to close.

“However, press; military, paramilitary, police and emergency services will be exempted from the purview of the bandh. Those attending any programme, conference or wedding are requested to carry along with them necessary evidences to avoid any untoward actions,” the press release stated.

The DNSU has appealed to the public to cooperate during the strike “in order to send a clear message to the centre that Northeast stands in sharp contrast with such unsentimental decision.”

Rengma Students’ Union

The Rengma Students’ Union has announced imposing total “bandh” in Tseminyu sub-division jurisdiction, in Kohima district, on the 8th from 5:00 am to 4:00 pm. This is to show the “deepest resentment against the Citizenship (Amendment) bill 2016,” the union stated in a note that was issued to the media on Monday.

The organisation has appealed the civil society, business community and the public in general to cooperate during the course of the agitation.

Exemption from the purview of the ‘bandh’ in the Tseminyu area: Press and media; medical and administrative authorities; police; paramilitary; pre-engaged programs such as wedding, conventions and conferences (citizens should possess card and programme copy); students moving back to their places of study (students should possess copy of tickets for their journey).

Zeliangrong Baudi

Elsewhere too, the Zeliangrong Baudi of Manipur has endorsed the 11-hour general strike called by ZSUM (Zeliangrong Student’s Union of Manipur) on January 8 in all Zeliangrong areas in Manipur. This is to express resentment against the Citizenship Bill, which was introduced on July 16 2016. It intends to amend the Citizenship Act of 1995 and seeks to give Indian citizenships to illegal migrants on religious preference especially to illegal immigrants who have come from Afghanistan, Bangladesh and Pakistan.

The organisation issued a note on Monday asking all concerned citizens living in the Zeliangrong areas to cooperate.

About the Citizenship (Amendment) Bill, 2016

Broadly, if the Citizenship (Amendment) Bill of 2016 is passed in Parliament, illegal migrants from certain minority communities coming from Afghanistan, Bangladesh, and Pakistan will be eligible for Indian citizenship. Illegal migrants belonging to the Hindu, Sikh, Buddhist, Jain, Parsi or Christian religious communities from Afghanistan, Bangladesh or Pakistan will not be imprisoned or deported. Moreover, these citizens gain permanent citizenship after six years of residency in India instead of 11 years as mentioned in the Citizenship Act of 1955.

(Internet sources)
