Nepali media in trouble; South Asian region is the victim of Indian arrogance

NP Upadhyaya

When the opposition in a democratic system is weak then the ruling party has a free hand in the State affairs and thus begins the first step: gagging the media.

This is dismal picture of Nepal of the recent years more so after Nepal embraced a new political culture with the imposition of the Delhi engineered 12 point agreement.

The radical communist RED government a la North Korea led by PM Oli has complicated the entire politics which appears to be heading for a totalitarian order. A challenge to the democratic world, if at all this come to their notice.

The US official who was in Kathmandu must have sensed that Nepal is sure to land in trouble sooner than later.

The idea was first to abolish the body of the Monarchy and then weaken the democratic forces and finally hit hard the nation’s judiciary and the Military institutions stepwise.

Observers guess that what had been designed by the alien regime beginning 1996-2006 or even early, the advent of 12 point agreement which is the second Delhi pact as Professor Sushil Pandey had termed it a decade back, has finished Nepal as per the long drawn design.

First the monarchy was hit and sent to the jungles. Secondly, the democratic forces, read the Nepali congress and the rest of the parties having a democratic bend have been the valued target and the desired objective has already been achieved as one could see the democratic boys associated with the Nepali Congress fought almost a street war in between themselves allowing the people to witness the mockery of the imposed democratic system.

The democratic boys represented Deuba camp and his opponents, it is talked.

Such genealogical tussle has weakened the old and the sinking horse-the Nepali Congress that it is today.

Dr. Shekhar Koirala from his hometown has exploded a bombshell against party chief Deuba. The juicy fun shall begin now.

Then comes the Judiciary and the military institutions which in the recent years too have been attacked one way or the other and in the process have provided an opportunity to the lay men to ask as to whether Nepal’s judiciary could ever assert its previous impartial role?

The fact is that the honorable justices are being appointed on political lines.

Unfortunately the Nepali Army, one of the oldest institution of Nepal is also not doing well, rumors have it.

The Army remains a mere spectator as and when the neighboring Indian Border Security Forces enter into Nepal undermining Nepal’s sovereignty and threatens the people living in the no man’s land and also push the border pillars. PM Oli keeps silence when it comes to any issue that has links with India. Is this his India tilt?

Observers opine that the national army must take it as an aggression by the neighboring country and should have, as per national expectations, defended the motherland.

Unfortunately, so far not even a single instance has come to the notice of the common population wherein our army men may have defended the territories being invaded by the declared enemy in the South.

This means that the objectives that had been set by the engineers of the 12 point agreement in Delhi have all been met with through Nepal’s heroes and builders.

The monarchy is nowhere in the scene. The Nepali Congress is already a sinking horse. The judiciary is almost non-functional. Having said this on judiciary, some claim that with the entrance of honorable justice Cholendra S Rana, the sagging morale of the judiciary has received a new lease of life. Yet much remains to be seen in the days ahead.

The corrupt judges are being taken to task, we have been told. But yet, some justices still dominate the rulings of the courts on political lines even in the Apex Court of Nepal, it is believed.

The Nepali Congress committed some blunders in the past and for those sins, for example, made by late Girija Prasad Koirala and his hangers on then committed while importing the 12 point agreement from New Delhi during the 2005-6 “great political change” which had the tacit backing of the Indian foreign secretary Shyam Saran brought also some noticeable deflections in the structured policies in the Oldest party of Nepal, is paying a heavy price.

Late Shri GP Koirala, highly presumed to be the man of the Indian regime in those days (2005-6), ruled the Nepali Congress party as its President much the same way as Adolph Hitler took his party which later brought untold miserable consequences not only to him personally but also caused Himalayan damage to the civilized world.

Had he been alive and observed the Pulwama attack, the NC leader would have talked personally with the incumbent Indian Prime Minister Modi and suggested on behalf of the Indian government to “block” the water flow to Pakistan passing through the Indian land mass.

Now that the Indian Transport minister Nitin Gadkari has said that his country has vowed last Thursday to cut back on water flowing through its rivers to Pakistan, a threat it has made before but now seems more determined to carry out in the wake of a suicide bomb attack last week for which India has blamed Pakistan.

Observers in Nepal opine that “this was the strongest threat India has made ever in the recent years more so after the Pulwama attack that killed more than 40 Indian Central Reserve Police Force troops in the disputed and the troubled area of India tortured Kashmir.

If India intends to control the river flow to Pakistan then naturally Nepal too has the right to divert the waters that flow to India through the Nepali landmass.

But what will happen if Tibet, China diverts the flow of the Brahmaputra River that flow through Assam, India? China too has the right much the same way as India claims for Pakistan.

Attacking Minister Gadkari’s meaningless talks, the Indian Congress last Friday said it was an attempt to “package high octane jingoism to subterfuge national security failures”.

To put the record straight water sharing between the two countries has been governed by the Indus Water treaty of 1960, and how does it impact the sharing of water between India and Pakistan? The treaty, as far as we understand was brokered by the World Bank where it was decided that India would have control over three rivers: Beas, Ravi and Sutlej on the eastern side, and Pakistan would control the Indus, Chenab and Jhelum on the western side. However, the treaty allows India to construct hydro-power projects on western rivers on run of river technology without affecting the flows to Pakistan.

While Nitin Gadkari is spitting venom against Pakistan then Imran Khan led government has initiated backdoor contacts with India.

A Pakistan Tehreek-e-Insaf (PTI) Hindu leader Ramesh Kumar Vankwani, who is currently in India, has met Indian Prime Minister Narendra Modi and External Affairs Minister Sushma Swaraj.

He is perhaps the special emissary of Imran Khan.

Reports have it that Mr. Vankwani also met with Minster of State for External Affairs General VK Singh, the four-star general who has also served as the Indian army chief.

“I have communicated a positive note to the Indian leaders and I hope there will now be a change in their behavior,” Vankwani said this while talking to Express Tribune over phone.

He was in India on a religious trip amid heightened tensions between the two rival states in the wake of February 14 Pulwama attack.

The track two diplomacy appears to have worked. Pakistan as promised has given peace a fresh chance by taking the first steps in this regard. Now it should be the turn of New Delhi to reciprocate steps to deescalate the heightened Indo-Pak conflict.

Yet New Delhi is making foul cries and warning Pakistan that it will teach a lesson.

The entire South Asian region shall benefit from the Indo-Pakistan cordial relations. The Saudi Prince too had promised that he shall work to defuse Indo-Pak tensions while visiting India just the last week.

Coming back to PM Modi’s insensitivities exhibited for the Pulwama killed CRPF men, the

Congress spokesperson Manish Tewari, organizing a press conference exposed Modi by saying that “he was busy in a photo shoot at the Jim Corbett National Park on February 14”.

“We want to ask the prime minister what he was doing between 3:10-5:10 pm, when you address a public rally in Uttarakhand through mobile phone,” Tewari asked. During this time the Pulwama incident had taken place.

Yet another Congress representative says, “When the whole country was mourning the loss of lives of the CRPF men in Pulwama in the afternoon, PM Narendra Modi was busy shooting for a film in Jim Corbett Park till evening. Is there any PM in the world like this? I have no words really,” Congress’ national spokesperson Randeep Surjewala said.

For the road: BIMSTEC is primarily India driven, according to Joyeeta Bhattacharjee, ORF. She is a Senior Fellow with ORF’s Neighborhood Regional Studies Initiative. Nepal must now quit BIMSTEC for multiple reasons.

On the CPEC: Pakistan is more than happy with the China aided CPEC mega projects which has been freshly partnered by Saudi Arabia. This is Mohammad Bin Suleman’s first phase of investment worth 20 Billion in Pakistan.

From the beginning, the China-Pakistan Economic Corridor (CPEC) has been a strictly bilateral project between Pakistan and China. Even though other countries have been invited to join in at various times, control of the project remained with the original partners. According to the contracts, various media agencies claim, other countries too can join CPEC-related projects but the policymaking and implementation is to remain a bilateral arrangement between China and Pakistan.

Here is a news flash: A fresh news is that India has made air attacks in Pakistan. This has made the South Asian region very politically unstable. However, Pakistan so far has not retaliated fiercely. That’s all.
