Celebrities give mixed reactions on Pakistan-India tensions

Pakistani stars though cautious but Indian violation of Pakistani airspace has worked them up

(Web Desk) – Tensions between India and Pakistan have been running high for quite some time. Pakistani stars though have remained cautious but Indian violation of Pakistani airspace, has worked them up too.

After Pakistan Air Force, shot down Indian jets, amid the blood thirsty, war hawks jingoism, Pakistani celebs are showing their reaction through social media.

Shaan Shahid, was the first to react to Indian war hysteria and after the act of war, violation of Loc, said that we are prepared and all set to defend our freedom at all cost.

‘Like death defends life war defends peace and we are ready to defend our freedom,’ said Shaan

Like death defends life .. war defends peace .. and we are ready to defend our freedom — Shaan Shahid (@mshaanshahid) February 27, 2019

He also reiterated his long advocated stance, to be proud of our own product and stars and not get caught up in Indian cultural hegemony.

‘If you find any Indian celebrity on billboards of Pakistan .then do what our PAF has done bring them down no more Indian cultural bombs.’ added Shaan.

If you find any Indian celebrity on billboards of Pakistan then do what our PAF has done bring them down no more Indian cultural bombs — Shaan Shahid (@mshaanshahid) February 27, 2019

Mawra Hocane, was quite impressed by the behavior of Pakistani armed forces with the captured Indian pilot and was shocked at the crude behavior of the blood thirsty leadership of India.

Pakistan is a responsible state and behaving in polite way with the arrested Indian pilots, DG ISPR. That’s my army men for you. Brave yet Kind. Unbelievable how a country’s leader is ready to risk MORE lives just for a political gain, how human lives are of no value to them,’ she added.

Pakistan is a responsible state and behaving in polite way with the arrested Indian pilots, DG ISPR



That’s my army men for you. Brave yet Kind. Unbelievable how a country’s leader is ready to risk MORE lives just for a political gain, how human lives are of no value to them. — MAWRA HOCANE (@MawraHocane) February 27, 2019

She further advocated Pakistan’s stance for peace and not war.

‘Stop the war-mongering when this region is finally moving towards stability. We’ve fought the war with terrorism way too long & we know what it looks like. Pakistan is opting for peace despite the whole circus. I am so proud of our sensibilities, PAKISTANZINDABAD, she added.

Stop the war-mongering when this region is finally moving towards stability.

We’ve fought the war with terrorism way too long & we know what it looks like.

Pakistan is opting for peace despite the whole circus.

I am so proud of our sensibilities PAKISTANZINDABAD — MAWRA HOCANE (@MawraHocane) February 27, 2019

Rabi Pirzada furious with Indian aggression, in her video message, warned that India only has big cinematic heroes, namely Akshay Kumar, Ranbir Kapoor etc. Now that Pakistan that has responded, cool down! She further praised the Pakistan army.

Salman Ahmed tweeted, that Paksitanis are peace loving people and don’t want to indulge in war but if India continues its policy of state terrosim, she will have to deal with the whole nation of 210 million.

‘Make no mistake @PMOIndia, Pakistanis don’t want war but if you miscalculate any further @ImranKhanPTI will have a 210 million army defending against Indian state terrorism’, he said.

Make no mistake @PMOIndia , Pakistanis don’t want war but if you miscalculate any further @ImranKhanPTI will have a 210 million army defending against Indian state terrorism https://t.co/aAGDSS6MGz — salman ahmad (@sufisal) February 27, 2019

He further tweeted about the gracious treatment of the captured Indian pilot.

‘Tea in, uninvited, but Wing Commander Abhinander is still in very safe hands of the army,’ he added.

Tea in, uninvited, but Wing Commander Abhinander is still in very safe hands of the army. https://t.co/8MZdUkZn2r — salman ahmad (@sufisal) February 27, 2019

Amreena Khan posted on Instagram:



Sajal Aly, stated that the need of the hour is to fight against social evils, instead of going on all out war, based on religious differences and nationality.

‘War shouldn’t be against two religions nor two nationalities but against the evil that puts us against each other. We should be fighting against poverty, illiteracy, unemployment, disease, & terrorism That is what we need. War should be off the table,’ she added.

Maya Ali, agreed with the message of peace, delivered by PM Imran Khan.

‘Perfectly said by our Prime Minister @imrankhan.pti, a sensible and peaceful message sent out, Pakistan Zindabad,’ she added.

Aisha Khan, posted the Paksitani flag as a sign of solidarity.

Farhan Saeed, also championed peace, but if the other side is hell bent on chaos, then we re up for it.

‘Peace, Not war! Peace, Not war! Peace, Not war! But still if you don t get it then get ready he tweeted.

Peace, Not war Peace, Not war! Peace, Not war!



But still if you don t get it then get ready PakistanStrikesBack PakistanZindabad — Farhan Saeed (@farhan_saeed) February 27, 2019

Urwa Hocane, praised the resolve of PM Imran Khan and Pak Army, who despite being fully able, were hopeful to work for peace.

Better sense must prevail, says my PM @ImranKhanPTI. Despite being more than ready & capable of war, we want peace, says DG ISPR Asif Ghafoor. Proud of my Leaders, Pak Army & my Nation for this Strength, Maturity & Grace. We’re a peace loving country indeed,’ she added.

“Better sense must prevail” says my PM @ImranKhanPTI -“Despite being more than ready & capable of war, we want peace” says DG ISPR Asif Ghafoor. Proud of my Leaders, Pak Army & my Nation for this Strength,Maturity & Grace! We’re a peace loving country indeed!#PakistanZindabad — URWA HOCANE (@VJURWA) February 27, 2019

Faysal Quraishi, paid tribute to the zeal and passion of the armed forces and the nation equally, but was against celebrating war.

‘We are blessed to have such brave sons in our forces and have such Jazba in overall nation but, please remember war is not something anyone should celebrate!,’ he added.

We are blessed to have such brave sons in our forces and have such Jazba in overall nation but, please remember war is not something anyone should celebrate! — Faysal Quraishi (@faysalquraishi) February 27, 2019

Furthermore he tweeted:

Mikaal Zulfiqar, commended PAF who were the Heroes of the day.

‘Defenders by day, Protectors at night. To All personnel of Pakistan Air Force, Our Shaheed s, those who have left us, serving, non serving and future recruits, PAF you are the REAL Heroes and today you proved it! Pakistan ZINDABAD,’ he added.

Ahsan Khan, also preached peace backing fully the stance of the armed forces

‘So true War has never been a solution to any conflict. Pakistan is a peace loving country,hope sense prevails,’ he saed.

Humayun Saeed, also propagated the message of peace.

‘Peace is the only way forward. We love our country, we love our armed forces. Pakistan Zindabad, he added.

Peace is the only way forward. We love our country, we love our armed forces. Pakistan Zindabad — Humayun Saeed (@iamhumayunsaeed) February 27, 2019

Hamza Ali Abbasi, mocked the Indian war conundrum, which toned down after two of their fighter jets were shot down by PAF.‘IND: WAR!

PAK: NO!

IND: WAR WAR WAR!

PAK: (Shoots down 2 Indian fighter jets, arrests 2 pilots) OK SERIOUSLY, WAR?

IND: Ok ok fine. No war, he added.

IND: WAR!

PAK: NO!

IND: WAR WAR WAR!

PAK: (Shoots down 2 Indian fighter jets, arrests 2 pilots) OK SERIOUSLY, WAR?



IND: Ok ok fine. No war PakistanZindabaad pic.twitter.com/imxM2cY5cG — Hamza Ali Abbasi (@iamhamzaabbasi) February 27, 2019

Aijaz Aslam, extolled the armed forces for defending the motherland and not letting anyone mess with our integrity.

‘Thats how we respond to enemies, dont mess with Pakistan, salute, respect, pakistanarmy, pakistanairforce, pakistannavy, dont mess with pakistan,’ he added.

By

Saadia Ali
