Are we at the verge of war?

The ongoing dangerous standoff between the two hostile nuclear neighbors is leading towards a worldwide catastrophe. The background for this critical juncture is consequential to understand. Both the states, India and Pakistan- parted their ways in 1947, on the basis of distinct ideologies after living hundreds of years together. The animosity and antipathy refused to die down even after partition and war hysteria continued to hover over the afore-stated states. Several wars have been fought between Pakistan and India in order to prove superiority over each other or to gain certain political or geographical gains.

However, in the recent developments, India is flexing its muscles to become a regional power without any impediment. India’s deepening ties with the US and its bid to join the Nuclear Non Suppliers Group (NSG) are clear indications that Indian wants to increase its clout in South Asia. Not only this, India’s reign of terror in Kashmir, its massive drive towards signing deals with states for increasing nuclear arsenals and its hybrid warfare on Pakistan will seriously disturb strategic equation in South Asia.

In the current scenario, the militant government in New Delhi spearheaded by Narendra Modi is wreaking havoc on regional peace and stability just for the sake of political gain. As elections are fast approaching in India to turn the public’s attention from internal problems to external dangers, Modi played this stunt. For this, India has vehemently labeled Pakistan for its role in terrorist activities and India to arouse public sentiments against Pakistan.

On 14 February, 2019, India started its outcry for Pakistan’s alleged role in the Pulwama suicide attack in the Indian occupied Kashmir where more than 40 Indian military personnel were killed. For this, New Delhi has adopted a harsh and hellish rhetoric towards Pakistan and asked for Jaish-e-Muhammad (JeM) and Maulana Masood Azhar’s involvement under the supervision of Pakistan. These are all false accusations without any justification. Modi has adopted this strategy of brinkmanship to achieve his nefarious political goals.

On 26 February 2019, Indian fighter jets (Mirage 2000) took flights over Line of Control (LoC). According to the Indian Media and government statements, the jets struck Balakot where they destroyed a madrassa of Jaish-e-Muhammad

On 26 February 2019, Indian fighter jets (Mirage 2000) took flights over Line of Control (LoC). According to the Indian Media and government statements, the jets struck Balakot where they destroyed the residence of Jaish-e-muhammad (JeM) killing Maulana Masood Azhar and his close relatives. However, the Inter services Public Relations (ISPR) issued a press briefing that Indian jets moved only 3 to 4 kilometer inside Pakistani territory and changed their course back to India. These series of incidents have brought Pakistan and India on the verge of nuclear war. On this critical point, both the states need to understand the regional dynamics and the aftermath of the war. Pakistan is behaving maturely and asking to initiate a peace process. Imran Khan’s offer to India to conduct investigations for Pulwama attack is a wise move on Pakistan’s part. Moreover, Pakistan has reiterated time and again that it is a peace loving state and believes in mutual interests, trade links and bilateral relations. If these concerns are not fulfilled by India than Pakistan has the capacity to avert any danger or attack.

According to Pakistan’s foreign office spokesperson, Pakistan’s arms forces are ready to take decisive action against any Indian attack. Meetings were called in the foreign office on the seriousness of the issue and conveyed to India that Pakistan is ready to reply in the same coin. India should look at the political and strategic calculus of South Asia and should extend an olive branch for peaceful coexistence. Thus, India must join Pakistan’s hand to avert the chances of War in the already volatile region.

International powers, especially the US should play a positive role for the settlement between the two regional competitors. America, being a world leader must bring rapprochement between India and Pakistan through offering its good offices for the resolution of the long standing Kashmir and water issues. Along with this, the toothless paper tiger, the UNO, should act on the grave human rights violations in Indian held Kashmir and should enforce its resolutions in Kashmir. Without the involvement of UNO and the US, Pakistan and India will continue to endanger this world with the threat of nuclear war.

The writer is a Quetta based columnist and an independent researcher

Published in Daily Times, February 28th 2019.
