Sindh Assembly condemns Indian plot to spark war in region

KARACHI: The Sindh Assembly on Wednesday condemned Indian designs to turn the whole region into a battlefield and commended the Pakistan Air Force for its bravery to defeat the marauding Indian jets.

Many members stressed that war itself was a problem instead of a solution, yet Pakistanis would fight valiantly if an unnecessary war was imposed upon them.

The lawmakers spoke at length on yet another resolution — second in a row — moved by all parties in the house to discuss the situation in the aftermath of India’s aggression.

Speaker Agha Siraj Durrani suspended the entire day’s business and allowed Pakistan Peoples Party’s Tanzeela Sheedi, Pakistan Tehreek-i-Insaf’s Umer Umari, Muttahida Qaumi Movement-Pakistan’s Mohammad Hussain, Tehreek-i-Labbaik Pakistan’s Mohammad Qasim, Muttahida Majlis-i-Amal’s Abdul Rasheed and Grand Democratic Alliance’s Nusrat Sehar Abbasi and Hasnain Mirza to table the resolution.

According to the resolution, the house condemned the “violation by the Indian Air Force” and “appreciates the effective combat by our high-spirited Pakistan Air Force. This house stands unified with our armed forces and their commendable efforts in protection of our motherland”.

The movers vehemently condemned Indian leadership for thrusting the entire region into a fireball that would not allow anyone to prosper.

They said peace was the most beautiful thing to have; yet, the country of 220 million would not sit back if a war was imposed on it.

The speaker suspends the day’s agenda to discuss prevailing border situation

They criticised Indian Prime Minister Narendra Modi for designing a plot that could unfold greater miseries for the more than 1.5 billion people of the subcontinent.

“For the sake of winning a general election, the extremist-minded politician in India has put so many people on the verge of a huge disaster,” said a mover.

Education Minister Sardar Shah quoted poet Sahir Ludhianvi and said: “War does not solve problems; but it is itself a problem.”

He said being a resident of a district bordering India he knew how hard a war could be. “Only humanity gets defeated in a war; we, the peace-loving people don’t need any war.”

He, however, said that everyone in Pakistan would not sit back in case war was imposed on the motherland.

He said a secular India had died the day Mahatma Gandhi was assassinated 70 years ago. “At present India is in the hands of extremists and lunatic fringe. They want a war, little knowing that every war kills mothers and children.”

PTI govt asked to review its foreign policy

The minister said his party was completely with the armed forces and asked the PTI-led government to review its existing foreign policy, as at present no one, except Turkey, had supported Pakistan’s stance in the present course of events. “Saudi Arabia, China, America and other countries are silent. Why are they silent on the issue of Kashmir and on present scenario?”

He said Imran Khan was Pakistan’s prime minister and not of PTI alone.

“In the situation we are passing through now, Khan Sahib should have been flanked by Asif Ali Zardari and Bilawal Bhutto on the one hand and Nawaz Sharif and Shahbaz Sharif on the other. It is the time of national unity,” he added.

He said the government would have to review its stance vis-à-vis politics in addition to a full-scale review of the foreign policy.

Minister Shah said India was not capable of even thinking to go for a war with another nuclear state, as those were not just toys to amuse children.

He said the next foreign policy should be devised with the nod of entire parliament and consensus approval by all political parties present in assemblies.

He said mere statements by the foreign minister or prime minister were not sufficient. The PM should show statesmanship, get all political leaders around him and deliver a unified message for the rest of the world.

The minister appreciated the liberal forces in India who had openly rejected war in the region and demanded for greater people-to-people contact. “Pakistan has never initiated a war. The liberal and progressive forces should come forward and ensure peace stays here permanently”.

Agriculture Minister Ismail Rahu appreciated the PAF, adding that the country’s force to guard its airspace had achieved what it had promised to do.

He warned India that Pakistanis would not retreat in the event of a war and would inflict a painful defeat to its forces. He said the Indian intellectuals had saner views against warmongering.

MQM-P praises PM’s ‘statesmanship’

MQM-P’s Khwaja Izharul Hasan said his party sided with the military leadership. He said India was in the hands of history’s most adventurist and immature politician.

He appreciated PM Khan for his message of peace for India, adding that the prime minister had represented the whole of Pakistan through his statesmanship.

PPP’s Sharjeel Inam Memon said PM Modi had put the entire region into a great danger that could ignite a war and spread elsewhere in the world.

PTI’s parliamentary party leader Haleem Adil Shaikh said though PAF had shot down Indian planes, the surprise element for India which the Pakistani leadership had hinted at still remained.

MQM-P’s Rabia Khatoon said Modi’s government’s was anti-people.

GDA’s Shaharyar Mahar said the Indian prime minister was steering the entire region towards war. He said war was not a joke; it was a serious business and no one emerged as a winner after it ended.

PPP’s Sadia Javed said war was not fruitful for both countries.

GDA’s Arif Jatoi said Pakistan was ready to face any war; yet, it was better for the people of the two countries to maintain peace.

MQM-P’s Jawed Hanif said a war could only be better if it was fought against hunger and poverty.

Marui Rashdi said Mr Modi wanted to kill people only to perpetuate his reign over India.

Women Development Minister Shehla Raza said Pakistan wanted peace but that should not be taken as cowardice.

Makhdoom Mehboob and Jamal Siddiqui also spoke.

Published in Dawn, February 28th, 2019
