Electric Commercial Vehicle Market Size, Global Demand, Growth Rate, Top Companies, Industry Analysis, Regional Outlook, Forecast To 2023 « MarketersMEDIA – Press Release Distribution Services – News 

Electric Commercial Vehicle Market has seen remarkable growth by 2023, Electric Commercial Vehicle Market expected to rise at substantial CAGR by Forecast 2023

—

Electric Commercial Vehicle Market Overview:

Governments are promoting the use of energy-efficient and less fossil dependent road transport system. Countries are planning to ban the production of fossil fuel powered vehicles. Norway and Netherlands considering the ban before 2025, along with India and Germany to impose similar bans in 2030. Continuous rise in awareness about use of renewable transportation options; hence the shift from diesel to electric is likely to be happen faster. In recent time organizations are developing vehicles capable to operate on renewable sources within the spectrum of green transport.

Efforts for technological improvements and innovation in transport have been intensified and fleets of vehicles using renewable sources is the new trend for public authorities, non-profit organizations and many private companies promoting sustainable development. Demand of electric commercial vehicle such as electric truck in the logistics industry to curtail fuel expenses is already on its peak. Companies are working to increase EV battery capacity and enable electric commercial vehicle to transport substantial loads over longer range. Increasing demand of emission-free vehicle is expected to fuel the market growth.

Electric Commercial Vehicle Market is projected to witness substantial CAGR by 2023

Get Sample Copy of Report @

https://www.marketresearchfuture.com/sample_request/6921

Key Players:

The prominent players in the global electric commercial vehicle market include Tesla (US), Nissan (Japan), BYD (China), Daimler (Germany), Proterra (US), LG Chem (South Korea), Zhongtong Bus Holding Co., Ltd (China) and Panasonic (Japan). Delphi (US), ABB (Switzerland), Continental (Germany), Siemens (Germany), Mitsubishi Electric (Japan), Toshiba (Japan), Ballard Power Systems (Canada), are among others.

Market Research Analysis:

In terms of region, the global electric commercial vehicle market is segmented into North America, Europe, Asia-Pacific, and the Rest of the World. Asia-pacific is estimated to dominate the market during the forecast period followed by Europe and North America. Increasing investment in development of charging infrastructure and increasing initiatives to create awareness about the benefit associated with electric commercial vehicle in countries like China, Japan, and South Korea are expected to drive the electric commercial vehicle market growth in Asia-Pacific region. China is expected to lead the electric commercial vehicle market Asia-Pacific region due to the government policies to restrict urban pollution and increased engagement of OEMs to develop electric commercial vehicles.

Europe is expected to hold the substantial market share during the forecast period. Increasing concentration on the development of the required infrastructure, such as charging stations, is expected to drive the electric commercial vehicle market in Europe. The electric commercial vehicle market in North America region is driven by the stringent rules and regulations enforced by government for vehicular emission control. Electric commercial vehicle market in Rest of the World region is primarily driven by the increase in buying power of consumers and expected growth in electric vehicle charging infrastructure throughout the region.

Electric Commercial Vehicle Market Segmentation:

Global electric commercial vehicle market is segmented on the basis of vehicle type, propulsion, components, range, and region. Vehicle type segment is divided into bus, trucks and others.

On the basis of component, the market has been segmented into electric motor, EV battery, hydrogen fuel cell, and others. Propulsion segment is further classified as, battery electric vehicle, hybrid electric vehicle, plug in hybrid electric vehicle, and fuel cell electric vehicle. Range segment is divided as 0-150 miles, 151-250 miles, 251-500 miles, and above 500 miles.

Scope of the Report:

This study provides an overview of the global electric commercial vehicle market, tracking four market segments across four geographic regions. The report studies key players, providing a five-year annual trend analysis that highlights market size, volume, and share for North America, Europe, Asia-Pacific, and the Rest of the World. The report also provides a forecast, focusing on the market opportunities for the next five years for each region. The scope of the study segments the global electric commercial vehicle market by vehicle type, propulsion, range, component, and regions.

Table of Contents

1.Executive Summary

2.Scope of The Report

2.1. Market Definition

2.2. Scope of The Study

2.2.1. Definition

2.2.2. Research Objective

2.2.3. Assumptions

2.2.4. Limitations

2.3. Research Process

2.3.1. Primary Research

2.3.2. Secondary Research

2.4. Market Size Estimation

2.5. Forecast Model

3.Market Landscape

3.1. Porter s Five Forces Analysis

3.1.1. Threat of New Entrants

3.1.2. Bargaining Power of Buyers

3.1.3. Threat of Substitutes

3.1.4. Segment Rivalry

3.1.5. Bargaining Power of Buyers

3.2. Value Chain/Supply Chain Analysis

Continued

Access Report @

https://www.marketresearchfuture.com/reports/electric-commercial-vehicle-market-6921

About Market Research Future:

At Market Research Future (MRFR), we enable our customers to unravel the complexity of various industries through our Cooked Research Report (CRR), Half-Cooked Research Reports (HCRR), Raw Research Reports (3R), Continuous-Feed Research (CFR), and Market Research & Consulting Services.

Contact Info:

Name: Dhanashree Pawar

Email: Send Email

Organization: Market Research Future

Address: Office No. 528, Amanora Chambers, Magarpatta Road, Hadapsar

Phone: 6468459312

Website: https://www.marketresearchfuture.com/reports/electric-commercial-vehicle-market-6921

Source URL: https://marketersmedia.com/electric-commercial-vehicle-market-size-global-demand-growth-rate-top-companies-industry-analysis-regional-outlook-forecast-to-2023/486765

Source: MarketersMedia

Release ID: 486765
