Andhra CM Naidu backs call for protests against PM Modi's Vizag visit

Andhra CM Naidu backs call for protests against PM Modi's Vizag visit

Naidu said the TDP would support the protest called against the Centre for not conferring special category status to the state.

news Protest

Andhra Pradesh Chief Minister N Chandrababu Naidu on Wednesday said his Telugu Desam Party (TDP) would participate in the protests against Prime Minister Narendra Modi's visit to this port city on Friday.

In a teleconference with TDP leaders, Naidu said the party would support the protest called by Prateekya Hoda Sadhana Samiti Joint Action Committee over the Centre not conferring special category status on the state and not fulfilling other promises made in Andhra Pradesh Reorganisation Act.

The JAC, which comprises various like-minded parties and groups fighting for special category status to the state, has said that Modi has no moral right to visit the state without fulfilling the commitments.

Political parties, people's organisations and trade unions which are not part of JAC have also called for the protest against Modi's visit. They include the Congress, Jana Sena and the Left parties.

Modi will address a public meeting at Visakhapatnam. Andhra Pradesh Chief Secretary Anil Chandra Punetha on Wednesday held a meeting with top officials in state capital Amaravati to review the arrangements for the Prime Minister's visit.

Modi had faced black-flag protests during his visit to the state's Guntur on February 10. Addressing a public meeting, he made a scathing attack on Naidu.

While the Centre on Wednesday announced a new railway zone with its headquarters at Visakhapatnam, it remains to be seen if that would pacify people, as their main demand of granting special status to the state is yet to be fulfilled.

Meanwhile, the TDP chief alleged that main opposition YSR Congress Party was busy in mobilising people for Modi's public meeting. He reiterated that YSR Congress is hand-in-glove with Modi and Telangana Chief Minister K Chandrasekhar Rao.

Simultaneous elections to Andhra Pradesh Assembly and Lok Sabha are due in April-May.

IANS inputs
