A humiliated nation

Sunil Sharan is the author of three books: (i) Lockdown: India Under Siege from Corona (RosettaBooks), (ii) Modi 2.0: Beyond the Ordinary (Bloomsbury), and (iii) How I Came to Christ (Wipf and Stock). LESS ... MORE

What gives, Pakistan? Bin Laden was found in your country. Now India has knocked bunches of terrorists belonging to a UN-proscribed group, the Jaish-e-Mohammad not too far from where Bin Laden lived.

You will hem and you will haw, you will duck and you will weave, as you did with the Indian surgical strikes of 2016. Now too you are pretending as if nothing much has happened, even as you are vowing revenge. Your citizens are asking how could Indian jets violate your airspace for a full 21 minutes, even as you claim that there was a delicate dance between your own jets and the Indian Mirages along the Line of Control, after which the Indian planes ran away.

Why didn’t you fire at the Indian jets when you were in a position to engage them in a dogfight? Your foreign minister, the continuously sombre Qureshi, insists that you did not fire because you did not want escalation. But you are vowing escalation and undying revenge now.

How is that the world’s most dreaded terrorists find refuge on your soil? Is it because you consider what most of the rest of the world considers as terrorists to be freedom fighters? But freedom from whom? Of Palestine from Israel? Of Kashmir from India? Of the rest of India’s Muslims from “Hindu” India?

After the Bin Laden raid, it was widely speculated that the then-Pakistani army chief Kayani knew about the raid beforehand and may even have colluded in its execution. Let’s suppose he didn’t. But right after the raid, he was a facing a colonel’s coup from his army and had to run from garrison to garrison to assuage ruffled feathers. Beghairat, the ghairat of it all! Kayani apparently saved himself by the skin of his teeth.

But Kayani was humiliated by Pakistan’s on-again, off-again friend of six decades, America. Now, the current army chief, Bajwa, has been humiliated in broad daylight by Pakistan’s eternal enemy, India. Or as Pakistan’s defence minister Khatak so eloquently, or so clumsily put, his forces were left groping in the dark.

Is Bajwa going to go? The only way he’s going to save his chair is promising retribution upon India. And by taking recourse to such action. But is it all worth it? The whole world knows that the Jaish, the Lashkar-e-Taiba, the Jamaat-ud-Dawa, the Hizbul-Mujahedin, and sundry such outfits are raised, trained and coddled by the Pakistani army, with only one aim, to humiliate India.

In fact it’s not only the military that looks after these terrorists. Shahbaz Sharif, as Pakistani Punjab’s chief minister, was famous for heftily funding the Jamaat-ud-Dawa (a proxy for Hafiz Saeed’s Laskar-e-Taiba) from taxpayer money.

Pakistan’s military spokesman just implied that what the world considers to be terror factories are in fact only madrassas, religious seminaries. But it is precisely in these madrassas that hate against infidels is spread, making them a fertile breeding ground for global jihad.

The Jaish could not have done Pulwama without the actual knowledge, if not the connivance, of the Pakistani army. Did not Bajwa know that the Indian elections were fast approaching and Narendra Modi, with his reputation for toughness, would have been toast in the elections if he would not have acted. Still, Modi has acted with careful jurisprudence and extensive planning. He has avoided civilian casualties and refused to engage military targets.

He has chosen the Jaish carefully for the Jaish has been a thorn in India’s side for decades now. He could not send ground troops over for that incursion would be dismissed just as the surgical strikes had been. His assault had to be pin-point and highly visible. He has achieved both aims with unerring accuracy.

Pakistan believes that India doesn’t want to discuss Kashmir with it, and unless it brings India down to its knees with jihadi action, India will not come to the negotiating table. India says, stop the jihad, and let’s talk. Pakistan, with perhaps some justification, believes that India will ignore it if peace is allowed to reign. Is Pakistan’s worry justified? No.

India has come close a couple of times in the last two decades to inking an accord on Kashmir with Pakistan. The problem is that whichever Pakistani ruler (Nawaz Sharif, Musharraf) tries to accommodate India’s sensibilities, gets deposed. And then India is left but nothing but bitter (from Bangladesh’s creation in 1971) hawks to deal with.

Will Pulwama and the Mirage incursion lead to escalation, or will the two sides talk now? Escalation is entirely possible because neither side is hurting hard enough just yet. Talks are more likely, but would India want talks under such circumstances. It wants all the jihadis in Pakistan to lose their jihadi inclinations, but Pakistan is never going to agree to that. And even if Pulwama and the Mirages lead to talks, and even a deal on Kashmir, many jihadis in Pakistan are not going to rest easy until India is destroyed.

So talk India can, but if the talks don’t go well for Pakistan, then Pakistan will once again unleash jihad, and the next time it does so, India will be precedent-bound to react.

Jinnah was wrong in saying that Hindus and Muslims have nothing in common. He was also wrong in hoping that India and Pakistan would live peacefully as the US and Canada do. But anyone who has lived in Canada knows that there is no more unpopular a country in that nation than the US. If the two countries were not in majoritarian part of the same ethnicity, and subscribed in the main to the same religion, they would have gone head to head many a time.

Pakistan shares ethnic links with much of India. While it shares a common religion with a substantial chunk of India, it does not do so with the majority in India. Its ghazi army (warriors of the faith) has been sworn to bring India under heel. India is equally determined not to let that happen. Good luck, Bajwa, in saving your job, even though you just gave a five-year extension to Narendra Modi, India’s sweet man of the moment.

Facebook Twitter Linkedin Email Disclaimer Views expressed above are the author's own.
