India nails Pakistan's F-16 lie, gives proof in joint press conference

India nails Pakistan's F-16 lie, gives proof in joint press conference

The IAF shot down an F-16 jet of Pakistan but it lost a MiG-21 whose pilot was captured by Pak army.

Pakistan has bowed to India's demand seeking safe return of Indian Air Force pilot who crashed into Pakistan-occupied Kashmir (PoK) on Wednesday after foiling Pak Air Force's attempt to target military installations. Wing Commander Abhinandan Varthaman will be released by Islamabad tomorrow. Pakistan PM Imran Khan made this announcement. He also said that both sides should try not to escalate the entire issue. In a joint services press conference, India called out several Pak lies and also displayed cover of AMRAAM missile shot from F16 jet. Pakistan had denied that it has used F16 jets in its attack on India on Wednesday.

How Indian diplomacy saved the day

Twitterati hail stance taken by Indian govt

The IAF shot down an F-16 jet of Pakistan as it foiled an attempt by the Pak jets to target military installations. An Indian pilot was captured by Pakistan after a MiG-21 was lost in the engagement.

All you need to know about IAF pilot Abhinandan

Here are the top developments from today-

High level CCS meeting currently underway. It is chaired by PM Modi.

Joint press conference of Indian Army, Indian Air Force and Indian Navy. Major general Surinder Singh mahal, Army, Rear Admiral DS Gujral, Navy, Air Vice Marshal RGK Kapoor are doing the press briefing.

IAF says that Pakistan made several misleading claims. IAF says while PAF said two planes and three pilots have been shot down, finally it had to scale down the numbers. PAF also claimed that no F-16 was used but India has enough proof that it do so. India also says Pakistan lied about not targetting military and civilian assets where in reality, it did so.

Army says that it is keeping an increased sense of response. Mechanised forces are on stand-by and strict vigil is kept in LoC and IB.

Navy AVM says that it is keeping high sense of readiness. Navy said that it stands as one with Army and airforce and will not allow any misadventure by Pakistan.

Visuals of cover of AARAM missile fired from Pakistani F-16 aircraft found near the LoC in India pic.twitter.com/qHdOm5cDqN — ANI (@ANI) February 28, 2019

16: 45 I

Pakistan is trying to create a Kandahar type pressure but India will not give in, there will be no deal or talks on Wing Commander Abhinandan Vartaman's release.

India expects Wing Commander Abhinandan to be returned immediately, there is no question of any deal. If Pakistan thinks they have a card to negotiate with then they are mistaken. India expects the Wing Commander to be treated in a humane manner

14:47 IST Thursday, 28 February 2019: India did not target any civilians or military installations, but Pakistan escalated by targeting Indian military installations. India did not deliberately cross LoC, very strong demarches have been given. India has foiled Pak attempts at creating a war psychosis, says sources

Pakistan Foreign Minister Shah Mehmood Qureshi says Pakistan is willing to consider returning the Indian pilot if it means de-escalation of ties between the two countries.

Immediate, credible & verifiable action against terror is required before any such conversation. Imran Khan should now walk the talk on dealing with terrorism. That is our message to Pakistan and International community, sources on being asked if Pakistan PM Imran Khan and PM Modi will talk.

India has not asked for consular access but immediate release of Wing Commander Abhinandan

We believe that the Pakistan air intrusion was an attack on military installations. We believe that the Indian Air Force Pilot was ill-treated by the Pakistan Army in violation of the Geneva convention. We believe that the Pakistan Army is actively supporting the Jaish-e-Mohammed and is harbouring the leaders including Masood Azhar in its facilities: Defence Ministry Officials

There will be a joint press briefing by Army, Air Force and Navy in New Delhi at 5 pm today

13:02 IST Thursday, 28 February 2019: The enemy tries to destabilize us, carries out terror attacks, they want to stop our growth. We all countrymen are standing like a rock to counter their evil designs - PM Modi

India will live as one, grow as one, fight as one, win as one - PM Modi

NSA Ajit Doval held phone talks with US Secretary of State Mike Pompeo late Wednesday night

File picture of cross section of F16 engine and wreckage of downed Pakistani F16 jet pic.twitter.com/Mq78QkLTz9 — ANI (@ANI) February 28, 2019

Sources confirm that the Indian Navy and Indian Coast Guard are on high alert along the coastline of Maharashtra and Gujarat amid escalation of tension between India and Pakistan

Pakistan suspends Samjhauta Express service

The three service chiefs to meet Defence Minister Nirmala Sitharaman shortly

How the events panned out

How India got back IAF pilot Nachiketa
