No question of any deal to secure Indian pilot's release, say govt sources after Pak links release to talks

Wing Commander Abhinandan Varthaman

New Delhi: India on Thursday emphatically stated that there was no question of having any deal with Pakistan as far as securing the release of Indian Air Force pilot, Wing Commander Abhinandan Varthaman was concerned. Highly-placed government sources said the IAF pilot has to be repatriated unconditionally and immediately. This came after Pakistan sought to link Abhinandan's release with the start of talks to defuse tensions.

"India has not asked for any consular access to IAF pilot, we want him back immediately," sources said, adding, "If Pakistan thinks they have a card to negotiate with, then they are mistaken. India expects the Wing Commander to be treated in a humane manner."

"Pakistan is trying to create a Kandahar-type pressure but India will not give in; there will be no deal or talks on Wing Commander Abhinandan Varthaman's release," sources further said.

Government sources said India is waiting for immediate, credible and verifiable action against terrorists and their proxies, adding Pakistan PM Imran Khan has to walk the talk on investigating the Pulwama terror attack.

Sources said the Pakistan Air Force specifically targeted Indian military facilities while India targeted only Jaish-e-Mohammed terror camp. "Why did the Pakistani PM say two Indian jets were downed, was he not briefed or did he say an untruth," sources asked.

"India did not target any civilians or military installations, but Pakistan escalated by targeting Indian military installations. India did not deliberately cross LoC; very strong demarches have been issued. India has foiled Pak attempts at creating a war psychosis," sources further said.

They said the government didn't consider giving actionable intelligence earlier as Pakistan has not acted in the past on actionable inputs on Mumbai and Pathankot attacks. "Terrorists were caught, audio given, access given to forward posts in Pathankot. Pakistan remained in denial. 13 days after Pulwama, they still deny JeM role."

Sources further said that India is ready for talks on Kartarpur. "They (Pakistan) had called it off just as they had closed airspace and stopped Samjhauta Express. We are trying to appear reasonable, they are creating a war hysteria."

"Pakistan has lied to the international community on Jaish-e-Mohammed, about two pilots in custody. They lied on Indian ships approaching, they have lied on missile strikes," they added.

Meanwhile, Pakistan's Foreign Minister Shah Mehmood Qureshi has said that his government is willing to consider returning captured Indian pilot Abhinandan Varthaman if it can lead to de-escalation of tensions between the two countries, reports Pakistan's Geo News.
