Bharat Bandh: Central trade unions go on 2-day nationwide strike; Left parties begin protest in Assam and West Bengal-India News , Firstpost

Various trade unions and farmers' and teachers' associations across the country have started the tw0-day nationwide strike. The Left parties have called affiliate unions to participate in the strike to protest against the Narendra Modi government.

Various trade unions and farmers' and teachers' associations across the country have started the tw0-day nationwide strike. The Left parties have called affiliate unions to participate in the strike to protest against the Narendra Modi government. Trade and farmers' unions have said they will stage rail and rasta roko (stop traffic and trains) protests in their respective areas.

Almost 20 crore workers from formal and informal sectors are protesting against the central government's alleged anti-worker policies and unilateral labour reforms, a group of 10 central trade unions said on Monday.

"As many as 10 central trade unions (CTUs) have joined hands to go on a two-day nationwide strike from tomorrow. We expect 20 crore workers to join the strike. This is the largest number of workers from formal and informal sectors joining the strike against anti-people and anti-worker policies of the BJP-led central government," Amarjeet Kaur, general secretary of All India Trade Union Congress (AITUC), told reporters in Delhi in a joint press conference of the 10 CTUs.

She said sectors like telecom, health, education, coal, steel, electricity, banking, insurance and transport among others are likely to support the strike. "We will go on a protest march from Mandi House to the Parliament in New Delhi on Wednesday. Similar protests would be held across the country," she said.

Scores of transport workers, demanding social security and a monthly salary of Rs 24,000, will also participate in the two-day strike on Tuesday, Live Mint reported.

The transport workers who have threatened to join the nationwide protests include employees of Mumbai’s BEST buses, Bengaluru’s Bangalore Metropolitan Transport Corporation (BMTC) and Karnataka State Road Transport Corporation (KSRTC) buses.

It is not yet clear whether Uber and Ola services will be affected or not. Kaur added that the CTUs are also opposed to unilateral labour reforms.

"We have given suggestions on labour codes. But during the discussion... trade unions' demands were rejected. We went on strike on 2 September, 2016. We also did three-day mahapadav (agitation) from 9 to 11 November in 2017. But the government did not come for dialogue, rather it went ahead with unilateral labour reforms," she said.

The 10 CTUs going on strike include Indian National Trade Union Congress (INTUC), AITUC, Hind Mazdoor Sabha (HMS), Centre of Indian Trade Unions (CITU), All India United Trade Union Centre (AIUTUC), Trade Union Coordination Centre (TUCC), Self Employed Women's Association (SEWA), All India Central Council of Trade Unions (AICCTU), Labour Progressive Federation (LPF) and United Trade Union Congress (UTUC). RSS-affiliate Bharatiya Mazdoor Sangh (BMS) will not participate.

"The government has failed to create jobs and grossly ignored the unions' 12-point charter of demands. The Group of Ministers headed by Finance Minister Arun Jaitley on labour issues has not called unions for any discussion since the strike on 2 September, 2015. This has left us with no other option but to go on strike," Kaur said.

In a joint statement, the CTUs also alleged that the government undermined tripartism and continued its "aggressive attack with arrogance on the lives and livelihood of the working people".

They are also opposed to the proposed amendments in Trade Union Act, 1926, saying those are irrational and extremely damaging to the independent functioning of unions.

"The unions claim that farming communities through their associations have also extended support to the strike. Student and teacher organisations of various universities have also declared support," the statement said.

With inputs from PTI
