India Demands Unconditional And Immediate Release Of Wing Commander Abhinandan From Pakistan

Pakistan captured one of the Indian Air Force Pilots yesterday and released a worrisome video of the combat fighter whose face was covered with blood, yet he maintained poise and dignity and failed to give any confidential information to the Pakistan armed forces.

As the video of a handcuffed Wing Commander Abhinandan Varthaman went viral on social media, Pakistan was accused of violating the Geneva conventions according to which Prisoners of War (POW) must be treated humanely in all circumstances. They are protected against any act of violence, as well as against intimidation, insults, and public curiosity.

Spokesperson of the Pakistan armed forces Asif Ghafoor even posted a picture of Varthaman a while later in which he can be seen holding a cup of tea. Pakistan claimed that he was being treated as per norms of military ethics.

Photo: AP/This still image taken from video circulated by Pakistan’s military

Soon, citizens started demanding that the Wing Commander should be brought back to India. Reportedly, Pakistan foreign minister Shah Mehmood Qureshi told Geo News on Thursday, “If there is de-escalation with the return of this [Indian] pilot, Pakistan is willing to consider this.

"I have just received the [Indian] dossier and have not gotten the chance to examine it. We briefed parliamentary leaders last night, there was a meeting of the cabinet. There is the joint session. I will still say that we will see and examine the dossier with an open heart,” he had told the Pakistani news channel.

AFP

However, a little while later, PTI reported that India has not asked for any consular access to the IAF pilot and is insisting on his unconditional and immediate return. The government sources further said that there was no question of any deal on the return of Wing Commander Abhinandan Varthaman who has been a part of the IAF since 2004.

"The IAF pilot has to be repatriated unconditionally and immediately. There is no question of any deal," the source said.

The sources also questioned Khan's statement on Wednesday that two Indian jets were downed in an air combat and asked, "was he not briefed or did he say an untruth".

The source even said that while India’s strike was strictly targeted at JeM terror camps Pakistan “specifically targeted Indian military facilities”. The report said that it was imperative for Pakistan Prime Minister to walk the talk on conducting an investigation into the Pulwama attack. India wants immediate, credible and verifiable action against terrorists and their proxies, the government sources added.
