BJP should fulfil its promise on Article 370

The columnist is a Political Strategist and Corporate Advisor. His passion is to help people unlock their hidden potential. Follow Vimal Singh on Twitter @VimalFuturist

The Pulwama terror attack has set the road map for Prime Minister Narendra Modi to prove his abilities and his leadership skills.

He can overcome this issue once and for all by removing Article 370.

Article 370 is a temporary provision in the Constitution due to which it did not needed to be passed by any House of Parliament.

The BJP in its mainfesto of 2014 had said that they will abrogate Article 370 if voted to power. But after forming government in Jammu and Kashmir with Mehbooba Mufti as the CM, this promise was put in the cold storage.

Kashmir is bread and butter for Pakistan army and its leaders. There is such a big disparity between the 10 per cent rich and the 90 per cent poor in Pakistan. Pakistan leadership and Pakistan army, which are the real power centres, are playing with the emotions of 90 per cent of the common poor people there. The children of 10 per cent population goes abroad for higher education. They promote madrassa instead of systematic education. Madrassas are controlled by the mullahas who are also benefitted by huge donations from Pak govt to promote jihadi culture in students. There is huge population of unemployed youth in Pakistan, the country has no big industrial investment and because of these the students get easily diverted by the mullahs. The day is not far when common Pakistani people will go against their leaders, mullahs and fight for their own prosperity and happiness.

The story is the same in Kashmir but due to heavy subsidies, people are able to survive. The 22-year-old youth who carried out the Pulwama terror strike was unemployed. He was brainwashed and possibly bribed to become a human bomb.

Article 370 of the Constitution, labelled as “temporary” by the Constituent Assembly, should be abrogated as per procedure laid out in the Constitution itself, which is that a public notification prepared by the Cabinet to declare that this article shall cease to be operative may be issued by the President of India.

With that, the Constitution of India will override the Constitution of Jammu & Kashmir and fresh laws may be enacted by Parliament for replacing Article 35-A.

Special category status is already there for J&K and like Uttarakhand, it must be utilised for preferential treatment in the form of more central assistance and tax breaks to make J&K an economically vibrant state so that its people have jobs.

With article 35-A inactive and Special category status, big industrialists will start to step into J&K with large investments leading to socio-economic development of this region. This is the need of the hour.

It is time for J&K to dissolve completely into the Indian Nation and for all Indians whether in J&K or outside it, to reap the benefits of its economic development and resultant peace in the region.

Some Indian politicians have already started making statements on this issue and have started saying its not possible to remove article 370. These politicians just want to polarise the voters.

Nature itself has given this opportunity to PM for making history without firing a single bullet, he can set the order of peace in this subcontinent. Not only will he be remembered as a HERO but a real Iron man in history all over the world.

Only courage with vision is required from PM Modi. It’s a golden opportunity for him.

Whatever the fears of Muslim repurcussions after the removal of it, the PM should take this step in interest of the nation and most importantly for the Kashmiri people.

Not only will the majority population come out in support, even 90 percent Muslims of this country will stand along with this resolution. Indian Muslims believe in inclusiveness and they will stand with India in this difficult time. Politicians, especially the regional parties, should avoid getting into petty politics on this matter. There is a likelihood that even countries like Saudi Arabia will support such a measure. It will transform India into one nation, one thought and peace will be established without any bloodshed.

Muslim world is witnessing a big transformation within their own community all over. Saudi has taken lead by realising that oil reserves will finish sooner than later. That’s why crown prince is deep into transformation of its country and giving a revolutionary message to Sunni Muslim all over the world that time has come we should walk shoulder to shoulder with people all over world. Oil is not going to be there for forever.

After repealing Article 370, Article 371-K can be enacted by Constitutional Amendment for special provisions for J&K. A wide range of safeguards are available to as many as 11 states in India, listed in Articles 371, 371A to 371H, and 371J.

All these provisions cater to the needs of special circumstances that exist in those areas in order to provide constitutional remedies for various socio-economic challenges.

But removal of art 35A will lead to prosperity of Kashmir which will bring India and Pakistan more close later.

Facebook Twitter Linkedin Email Disclaimer Views expressed above are the author's own.
