‘Nirmala Devi assaulted on transit and in jail’

Her advocate also says she was threatened with fake encounter

SRIVILLIPUTTUR

Nirmala Devi, accused in the audiotape scandal, was harassed in prison and assaulted while on transit between the court in Srivilliputtur and Madurai Central Prison, alleged her advocate S. Pasumpon Pandian.

Talking to reporters here on Thursday, Mr. Pandian said Nirmala Devi had remained silent in jail all these days. But, ever since she told media persons recently that her life was under threat and the case was foisted against her, she had been tortured and beaten up by the police.

During the last hearing on February 14, a huge posse of policemen were posted at the court to prevent her from talking to the media. She was manhandled and physically gagged so that she could not reveal anything, he said.

“She was roughed up while being bundled into the van by the police. She has suffered injuries,” Mr. Pandian alleged. Charging that the police van was stopped on the way to the jail and a few police personnel had threatened her at gunpoint that she could be bumped off on the pretext that she had attempted to escape from their custody.

“When she told them that she would reveal more facts before the media, she was beaten up. Only to suppress the fact that she has injuries, she was not made to physically appear before the court for remand extension today,” he alleged. The court heard the remand extension over video conferencing.

Charging that Nirmala Devi was harassed even in the jail and threatened at the government hospital when she went for a medical check-up, the advocate said she had even attempted to end her life.

Recalling that the Madurai Bench of the Madras High Court had stayed the hearing of the case pertaining to trafficking of four college girls on the promise of higher marks and money at Fast Track Mahila Court, Mr. Pandian said Nirmala Devi was ready for a CBI enquiry.

He charged that the CB-CID had framed the case so as to help the real culprits escape. “The CB-CID sleuths had forced Nirmala Devi and two other accused (Madurai Kamaraj University Assistant Professor V. Murugan and former research scholar S. Karuppasamy, who are now out on bail) to sign blank papers and foisted false charges against them.

Mr. Pandian said he had already sent a complaint to the State Human Rights Commission seeking action against the police personnel who had assaulted Nirmala Devi.
