CLU scam: Mayor, Cong councillors come out in Ashu’s support

Ludhiana: Followed by a protest staged by members of Punjab Ekta Party under the leadership of Sukhpal Khaira, councillors from West constituency and mayor Balkar Sandhu came out openly in support of cabinet minister Bharat Bhushan Ashu on Thursday to counter allegations against him in the CLU scam. The mayor and councillors raised doubts on the authenticity of the audio clip that had gone viral, saying both officers were playing into the hands of opposition parties, and everything was being done at their directions close to the general elections just to defame the Congress party.

The councillors claimed if these allegations were found correct, then they would ask Ashu to leave the cabinet and resign on moral grounds, but the inquiry report was bogus and the audio fake. Addressing a press conference that was called at short notice, Sandhu said: “As soon as the Akali Dal brought back Harish Rai Dhandha in the party, this controversy erupted, and the DSP (MC) remained very close to Dhandha. If the audio was recorded in July, then why he did not act at that time, and why did he not raise the matter in the media and the police?”

He said everything was being done at the direction of the opposition party, because they wanted to target the image of Ashu and Congress. “I have all the evidences with me, and will put them in front of senior leaders whenever required,” he said, adding that the DSP’s inquiry was not reliable because several cases were registered against him, including that of fake currency notes.

Meanwhile, Congress councillor Mamta Ashu (wife of cabinet minister Ashu) said: “We do not believe in this audio clip, and now when a committee has been formed by the assembly, then everything will become clear. Both the officers are corrupt, and Ashu had only made them realize their duties.” Answering queries of mediapersons, Mamta admitted that DSP Sekhon was appointed here in the city with Ashu’s consent, but on the request of cabinet minister Navjot Sidhu.

Senior Congress councillor Dr Jaiparkash said: “The DSP, along with cops, had come to his ward and started clicking pictures of under-construction structures of small houses. When I asked him how he came here to check the buildings, he said he was given directions by Sidhu. But in front of the mayor, he refused to visit my ward.”

CAMPAIGN ON SOCIAL MEDIA

While opposition parties are demanding Ashu’s resignation, his supporters have started a campaign in his favour on social media. His supporters are presenting Ashu as the most honest man in the city, proclaiming there was not a single blot on his image, and that he had always worked for society’s betterment.



Facebook Twitter Linkedin EMail
