RBI chief Shaktikanta Das cautions against farm loan waivers

Shaktikanta Das, the Reserve Bank's new chief, issued a note of caution against farm loan waivers on Monday. A few days after Prime Minister Narendra Modi said in an interview that farm loan waivers by the Congress failed to address farm debts, Das said a "generalised kind of farm loan write-off" has "an adverse impact on the credit culture and future credit behaviour of the borrowers".

The RBI governor's veiled advice against indiscriminate loan waivers come right after three Congress governments in Madhya Pradesh, Chhattisgarh and Rajasthan delivered on poll promises and announced farm loan waivers.

The three states joined Maharashtra and Uttar Pradesh (both governed by the BJP) and Karnataka (ruled by the JDS-Congress combine), which had also opted populist loan write-offs as a means to address farm distress.

Das clarified that elected governments have the mandate to take judicious financial decisions, but states must carefully examine their "fiscal space" to ascertain whether they have the elbow room to carry out such an exercise.

With the RBI governor also voting for contraindications of farm loan waivers, it's virtually clear that the Centre will not be going in for a nationwide exercise like the one by the three states, as reported by sections of the media

Das was speaking to the media in Delhi after a meeting with trade bodies on issues haunting micro, small and medium enterprises (MSME). He'll be meeting representatives of non-banking financial companies today.

This is yet another sector which is in distress and is impacting funding of sectors like real estate.

RBI meeting with MSMEs

Shaktikanta Das at a news conference on December 12, 2018. (Photo: Reuters)

Under Shaktikanta Das's predecessor Urjit Patel, the RBI had entered into a friction-ridden trajectory over a need for special attention and relaxation on lending rules for MSMEs. In fact the RBI had refused to relent on the issue before the prime minister launched a MSME support programme in early November, which, among other things, aimed to enhance credit access to micro, small and medium businesses.

On the RBI meeting with MSME representatives to elicit views of the sector on the implementation of the restructuring scheme announced by the RBI earlier, Das said "the mood in the MSME sector is certainly confident and I think they are looking forward. Banks have been asked to look at the viability of the individual MSME before restructuring."

The governor added that the RBI hopes MSME units and banks will be working together to ensure that the scheme is implemented in letter and spirit, so that the benefits are maximised.

On govt's liquidity concerns

If the overall liquidity situation in the country, especially for sectors like real estate, was another point of friction between the government and Urjit Patel, Das said the RBI is constantly monitoring the situation and would be taking real-time steps as and when a deficit is assessed.

Asking for rationalisation, Das added: "However I must also add that the RBI would not like a situation wherein the liquidity becomes kind of 'loose money'. Any infusion of liquidity will have to be very carefully considered and has to be need-based," he said.

Refusing to name the sectors which are facing a liquidity crunch, the RBI governor admitted that the central bank is taking care that there is no excess liquidity, as it has a tendency to create adverse impacts.
