chipko movement: Fashion designer Wendell Rodricks alleges threat from Goa PWD minister Sudin Dhavalikar

ancient mango trees

Fashion designer Wendell Rodricks

Colvale village

Chipko movement

national highway

Goa activists protesting around the trees

Fashion designer alleges Goa PWD minister Sudin Dhavalikar intimidated him over his fight to saveand a 100-year-old chapel in Colvale village; minister denies allegations, says he will axe none.on Thursday alleged intimidation by a Goa minister over the former’s fight to save six ancient mango trees and a 100-year-old chapel inin Goa. A part of the tree-saving campaign called, Rodricks alleged that Goa Public Works Department minister Sudin Dhavalikar sent a CID officer to his residence to enquire whether he was attending a meeting called by the minister over the issue of axing and demolition to make way for a“The PWD minister has approved the contract of cutting 200-year-old mango trees to build a flyover for the expansion of National Highway number 66 which passes through five states, including Goa. The minister has also allowed the demolition of a 100-year-old chapel in Colvale village. This demolition of an ancient religious place goes against the Supreme Court order. I have been opposing this destruction fearlessly, hence Dhavalikar is trying to threaten me,” Rodricks alleged while speaking to Mumbai Mirror over the phone. Rodricks, who was awarded the Padma Shri in 2014, said that a CID official visited his place early morning on Thursday and asked his partner weather Rodricks was planning to attend a meeting called by the minister later in the day. “I was pre-occupied and was not planning to attend the meeting. However, sending a CID official at someone’s residence to make such an enquiry is very undemocratic,” said Rodricks.Rodricks and a group of activists in Colvale village had gathered around the trees on Wednesday to oppose the presence of a contractor who has allegedly exposed the roots of some trees by digging the area. The contractor had informed the protesters that he had no permissions in place to uproot the trees but he was planning to cut them as the flyover would pass through the site.Opposing destruction in the name of development, Rodricks and his fellow activists said that the minister should come and answer the concerns raised by the villagers. “The contract of this part of the road is given to a Chinese company. These trees are the identity of our village and welcome everyone in our locality. How can Dhavalikar even think of felling them?” Rodricks asked.Dhavalikar, a member of Maharashtravadi Gomantak Party, said, “I don’t know that the CID went to this fashion designer’s residence. CID is doing its job. Why would I threaten him?” Dhavalikar agreed that on Thursday he addressed a meeting on the issue of felling the trees with other activists and PWD officers.“I want to clarify that we will save those trees. Someone went to chop some branches of one tree and I sent PWD officials immediately,” said Dhavalikar, adding that if one chapel is demolished he will construct another one. “There is some misinformation about my intentions,” he claimed. Meanwhile, Rodricks said he has decided to visit Delhi and seek intervention from the Centre.
