Travelling in Metro? You will no more be allowed to eat or drink except water

Mumbai Metro One

consumption of food and beverages

penalty

digital screens

clean and hygienic

to enforce ban, levy fines after two weeks.Mumbai Metro One has decided to enforce the ban onin the train. The commuters will be allowed to drink only water, said officials.The Mumbai Metro One has appealed to its commuters to refrain from eating or drinking in the train, cautioning them that heavy fines would be levied on the defaulters.The appeal is being made through in-train announcements, posters across all food retail outlets, signages at Metro stations. It is part of Mumbai Metro One’s twoweek campaign (February 27 to March 13). After the campaign is over, those violating the rules would be fined.“Eating and drinking in Metro trains is a punishable offence under The Metro Act, as it causes nuisance to fellow commuters. Aup to Rs 500 can be levied on the offenders,” said an officials of Mumbai Metro One“Consumption of eatables and beverages in metro trains is strictly prohibited. While there are food counters at concourse level for commuters, they are advised to finish their food at the respective counters before boarding the train,” he added.“An awareness campaign will be conducted throughat stations and on LCD screens in the train to deter commuters from consuming food and beverages while travelling. Since inception, Mumbai Metro One commuters have been extremely disciplined and supportive. The objective behind this campaign is to seek cooperation and compliance from those who violate the rules,” said the official.A Mumbai Metro One spokesperson said, “We believe in imbibing cleanliness as a habit among our employees and commuters. Our commuters play a big role in keeping the Metro. We urge our commuters to cooperate and maintain a high standards of cleanliness at Mumbai Metro One. Vigilant commuters act as messengers for cleanliness. Many commuters alert fellow commuters who are eating in train.”
