‘PM Modi not ready to talk to Imran until Pakistan acts against terrorism’

(This story originally appeared in on Mar 01, 2019)

NEW DELHI: India on Thursday responded to Pakistan foreign minister Shah Mehmood Qureshi ’s suggestion that his PM Imran Khan might speak to his Indian counterpart Narendra Modi , by saying that the neighbouring country should first “create the environment” for New Delhi to consider talks at the highest level.Top level sources said India expects the Pakistan PM to investigate terror groups and infrastructure operating from Pakistan’s soil as a pre-condition to consider any proposal for an engagement at the highest level. Sources said despite the relief of getting back IAF pilot Wing Commander Abhinanandan Varthaman, Modi will speak to Imran Khan after seeing “immediate, credible, verifiable action against terrorists and their infrastructure”.“PM Imran Khan is ready to talk to Narendra Modi on the telephone and ready to extend an invitation of peace. Is Modi ready?” Qureshi had asked in the morning.On Thursday evening, Russian President Vladimir Putin called PM Modi to express his condolences about the Pulwama attack and in support for India’s fight against terrorism.Meanwhile, the government remained busy in its diplomatic outreach to key countries, many of whom have stepped in to de-escalate tensions between the two nuclear-armed neighbours. India has stressed that Pakistan’s military aggression on Wednesday was a major escalation. India said it had focused on one terror camp in a “non-military, pre-emptive strike”, but Pakistan retaliated by targeting military installations. “How can that be a non-military strike? The only accurate thing Pakistan said was that they missed their targets,” said a source.India’s main interlocutors are the P-5 nations, as well as UAE and Saudi Arabia, two close friends of Pakistan. In fact, after the OIC issued a stern line against India’s strikes in Balakot , India ste-pped up to the OIC leadership to see whether Sushma Swaraj would be snubbed when she speaks at the OIC plenary on Friday. India was assured that she would be received with “honour”, sources said.Saudi Arabia’s ambassador met Modi on Thursday morning. Mohammed bin Zayed, crown prince of UAE and a close friend of India, tweeted in the evening that he had spoken to both the PMs and “stressed the importance of dealing wisely with recent developments”.India reached out to its key partners US, UK, France, Russia and others to sensitise them about the reason for the Balakot strike.Sources said the Pakistan government had called foreign embassies in Islamabad to say that India had positioned missiles, ordered ships to blockade Karachi port and was amassing thousands of troops on the border. “Since none of this can be done secretly, soon it became clear to everybody that Pakistan’s claims were fictitious,” a source said.India has concluded that Pakistan was creating a “war psychosis”, largely to get the international community to paint India as the aggressor and obscuring the reason for its strike in Balakot. Sources said India had insisted it was targeting terrorism inside Pakistan since Islamabad is unwilling to tackle it.India told its interlocutors that it had decided against giving intelligence to Pakistan. After Mumbai and Pathankot, India gave them dossiers and detailed intelligence, even allowing Pakistani investigators to a forward base. But Pakistan had refused to take action. Still, India had given Pakistan a large dossier on JeM regarding Pulwama, which was acknowledged by the Pakistan foreign ministry which promised to “study” it.
