Every Indian proud that Wing Commander Abhinandan is from Tamil Nadu, PM Modi says in Kanyakumari

Prime Minister Narendra Modi says every Indian is proud that Wing Commander Abhinandan Varthaman, the captured fighter pilot who Pakistan will release today, is from Tamil Nadu.

His remarks came at a function in Kanyakumari, located at Tamil Nadu's (and the Indian mainland's) southernmost tip, shortly before Wing Commander Varthaman was expected to be freed.

The Indian Air Force said on Thursday it saw Pakistan's decision to release Wing Commander Varthaman only as "a gesture which is in consonance with Geneva conventions". Pakistan Prime Minister Imran Khan said it was a "peace gesture".

Tensions between nuclear-armed neighbours India and Pakistan skyrocketed after New Delhi announced it had carried out a pre-emptive strike on Jaish-e-Mohammed in Pakistan, days after the terrorist group killed 40 Indian soldiers in Jammu and Kashir.

The day after it announced the strike, India said it had thwarted an attempt by Pakistan to target its military installations. It was during that aerial confrontation that Wing Commander Abhinandan Varthaman was captured by Pakistan.

Varthaman's MiG 21 was shot and he bailed out after bringing down a Pakistani F-16 fighter during a dogfight, Air Vice Marshal RGK Kapoor said on Thursday.

PM Modi said in Kanyakumari that the events of the past few days had demonstrated the strength of India's armed forces yet again and brought the nation closer. He took aim at the Congress, saying there was a time when news reports said the Air Force wanted to carry out a surgical strike after the 26/11 attack, but the UPA blocked it.

Today, he said, the news read that armed forces have full freedom to do what they want.

There was a time when the news reports would read- Air Force wanted to do surgical strike after 26/11 but UPA blocked it.



Today, we are in an era where the news reads- Armed forces have full freedom to do what they want : PM Modi #TNTrustsModi pic.twitter.com/OSjhkMPNOX BJP (@BJP4India) March 1, 2019

He also said a few parties, guided by Modi-hatred, have started hating India, and that he wished to tell them to stop weakening India to strengthen their politics.
