The Reader: Ways to achieve greater diversity in London’s arts

A lex Kingston [February 27] is right that there should be greater diversity in the theatre, but we should also aim for greater diversity in London’s thriving arts, fashion, film and music scene too.

BAME workers make up just 23 per cent of the capital’s creative sector, despite representing 40 per cent of London’s population. This under-representation — which extends to social class — is felt even more acutely at the top, with a strong glass-ceiling effect for both women and people from BAME groups.

As Kingston says, the Young Vic and other theatres, such as the Roundhouse, are making strides to diversify their workforce. But more needs to be done.

“Culture Club”, a new report by Centre for London, argues that London’s creative and cultural employers should do more to help the next generation of artists, producers and photographers. They should ensure that young people of all backgrounds get a shot at working in an industry where connections, class and cultural reference points can still count for as much as raw talent.

Employers can start by offering the London Living Wage to interns, amending recruitment practices to focus on talent rather than academic achievement, and creating a London-wide mentoring programme to broaden access.

Failing to make the most of London’s diverse talent will weaken one of its most successful sectors.

Richard Brown

Centre for London

EDITOR'S REPLY

Dear Richard

You are right to say it is not just London’s theatres that need to do more about diversity. Our creative industries are booming, with the latest figures showing that 24 per cent more jobs were created in the sector in just four years — which makes the lack of diversity even more glaring.

What can be done to correct it? Money always helps. Paid internships would benefit youngsters who can’t rely on parental subsidies. But there are other less obvious barriers to entry as well and the old adage that it is not what you know but who you know still has a ring of truth about it.

Perhaps policy makers can learn from the charity Arts Emergency, which teams up volunteers who work in the arts with youngsters trying to get a break. They offer everything from work experience to academic help in a bid to create what they describe as “an alternative old boy network”. With more volunteers and more funding that is an idea that could make a real difference.

Robert Dex, Arts Correspondent

Sex work should be decriminalised

I’ve been a sex worker for more than five years, working in a flat with friends and for a few months on the street when I didn’t have money to set myself up in premises. I felt safest working with other women and where we had installed CCTV for safety. But although my job is legal, if I work with someone else I risk being prosecuted for soliciting on the street or brothel-keeping in premises.

I’ve faced a lot of abusive clients but the most frightening thing was knowing that I couldn’t call the police. A friend of mine, who reported a gang that was threatening her, was told by the desk sergeant: “Are you telling me you are a prostitute? Because, if so, I’ll arrest you.”

We’re labelled criminals for doing our best to survive even though laws are against us. This cannot continue. This Sunday we at the English Collective of Prostitutes are launching a new campaign #makeallwomensafe to demand the Government decriminalises sex work.

Sarah Bowman

English Collective of Prostitutes

It pays to engage less in politics

Brexit has highlighted the difficulty of accommodating a one-off referendum decision within our form of parliamentary democracy. Our political equilibrium appears to depend upon the apathy induced by a system in which the citizen’s connection with politics is limited to participation in infrequent parliamentary elections.

I once believed that an engaged citizenry was the sign of a healthy democracy. However, the experiences of 2014 and 2016 suggest to me that low levels of political engagement are best for a system’s health.

John Cameron

India has never been an aggressor

Your editorial claim that “Pakistan believes, with some force, that India’s huge army exists to threaten it with invasion” is ridiculous [February 27].

India has never been an aggressor, whereas Pakistan is a military state in all but name. India has only ever been invaded and has defended its borders. It is not an instigator of attacks. To suggest otherwise is a gross misrepresentation of reality.

If there had been any intention of India invading Pakistan, it could have happened years ago. India is, and has always been, a peaceful nation.

Aarti Sethia
