How The UPA Government Diluted Its Stand Against Pakistan Post 26/11 Mumbai Terrorist Attack

Why these are being quoted is because in an article in the Economic Times , former Air Chief Marshal S Krishnaswamy says that after the terrorist attack on Mumbai, the Indian Air Force (IAF) has suggested a surgical strike but the (then) government resorted to caution and restraint.

It is intriguing, and looking at various correspondences on the issue that period, probably India was restrained by the US, its then president George Bush and even, perhaps, incoming president Barack Obama.

At a meeting with opinion makers in Lahore on 8 December 2008, US senators John McCain and Lindsey Graham said they were coming after meeting Singh, who, McCain said, was “emotional and visibly angry”.

McCain told the opinion makers that Pakistan must respond quickly since “Prime Minister Manmohan Singh said he will act within days”. The US senator, in response to a question what India would do if Pakistan failed to act, speculated New Delhi could attack the (terrorists) camps.

Before travelling to Lahore, McCain and Graham met Manmohan Singh in New Delhi on 2 December along with another senator Joseph Lieberman and the then US ambassador to India David C Mulford. The then national security advisor M K Narayanan was present in the meeting.

The then prime minister told them that the mood of the Indian public and politicians was the angriest he had ever seen in his political career. He urged strong US pressure on Pakistan to “take strong and swift action against LeT and all those involved in the Mumbai attack”.

Singh told the US team that the Mumbai attack was a “quantum leap in military sophistication” that required phenomenal planning, training and mastermind.

He is further reported to have told them that the misery he had seen in the hospitals from Mumbai attacks “haunts me and fills me with outrage”.

The then prime minister refers to his discussions with Bush as well as Obama, which probably indicates the US putting pressure on India not to act in view of its engagement in Afghanistan. Any action on India’s part to act against the Mumbai terrorist attack could have led to a setback in the US as it had been engaging Pakistan in its engagement in Afghanistan.

A cable on the meeting sent by the US embassy in New Delhi reported:
