Pakistan prepares to return Indian air force pilot as confrontation cools

Mr Abdul Majeed, 40, said he was one of a number of villagers who had beaten and thrown stones at the pilot.

"While in the stream he once again pointed his revolver at us and fearing that he may shoot directly at us, I threw a stone at him," he said. "Some of us did thrash him... because he had given us a tough time. But later we handed him over to the army personnel."

CONFLICTING CLAIMS

The conflict comes at a critical time for Indian Prime Minister Narendra Modi, who faces a general election that must be held by May.

Mr Modi is expected to benefit from the nationalist pride unleashed by his government's announcement on Tuesday that Indian warplanes had destroyed a major training camp of Jaish-e Mohammad, the militant group that claimed responsibility for the Feb 14 attack.

But there are growing calls from opposition parties for more information about just how successful the mission was.

India's Foreign Secretary Vijay Gokhale had said the strike killed "a very large number" of members of the group, and another senior government official told reporters that about 300 militants had been killed, but New Delhi has still to provide evidence to support that assessment.

Meanwhile, Pakistan said the Indian planes missed whatever they were aiming at, and that no-one died in the attack outside Balakot, a small town in Pakistan's Khyber Pakhtunkhwa province.

Villagers on the outskirts of Balakot told Reuters that one of their neighbours was wounded during the attack, but there were no other casualties and the Indian bombs caused negligible damage, although there was a madrasah (Islamic school) run by Jaish nearby.

On Thursday, Ms Mamata Banerjee, one of the main leaders of an Indian opposition coalition attempting to unseat Mr Modi, requested more information about the attack.

"We have the right to know how many people died in the air strike and who were they," she said. "We want to know the actual incident as we have not received any details."

Mr Amit Shah, the president of Mr Modi's Bharatiya Janata Party and one of its most influential figures, sought to dispel any doubt.

"People should decide if they trust India's armed forces or not," he said at an event on Friday. "Those who are doubting are helping Pakistan."
