Priyanka Chopra accused of 'glorifying war' in tweet supporting for India in stand-off with Pakistan

Priyanka Chopra has been accused of 'glorifying war' after she posted a tweet in support of the Indian Armed Forces amid heightened tensions between her home country and neighbouring Pakistan.

Her public statement of support sparked a fierce backlash, with thousands calling for her to be removed from her role as a Goodwill Ambassador for UNICEF.

The actress, who is friends with Meghan Markle, was criticised by Pakistani actress Armeena Rana Khan for the post which read 'Jai Hind (Long live India) #IndianArmedForces'.

'Hypocrite': Actress Priyanka Chopra roundly criticised for her support for Indian Armed Forces during outbreaks of fighting and breakdown of dilpomatic relations between India and Pakistan

'Long live India': Film star Priyanka Chopra posted this controversial tweet praising the Indian Army for their actions in the conflict

Khan said that the Bollywood star was a hypocrite because of her role as a UNICEF Goodwill Ambassador and that she could not be taken seriously any longer.

Responding to the tweet, Khan wrote: 'What?!!! But aren't you supposed to be Goodwill Ambassador for UNICEF? Screenshot this everyone and next time she speaks for peace and goodwill. Let's remind her of this hypocrisy.'

Khan also called on other Bollywood actors to be stopped from 'preaching to the world' if they continued to 'call for war' between the two nations.

Chopra, who was born in Jamshedpur in western India, is friends with Meghan Markle, now Duchess of Sussex. She was pictured attending the Duchess' wedding last year, but was not seen at her baby shower earlier this month

Actress Armeena Khan reacts angrily to Priyanka Chopra's show of support for the Indian Armed Forces, calling her a hypocrite and telling her followers that she should not be listened to in future

The Pakistani star had words for other Bollywood stars as well, saying that 'particular individuals' shouldn't be allowed to 'preach peace to the world'

Priyanka Chopra and husband Nick Jonas attend the 2019 Vanity Fair post-Oscar Party hosted by Radhika Jones at Wallis Annenberg Center for the Performing Arts last weekend

Conflict between India and Pakistan has escalated since a suicide bombing on February 14 that killed 40 Indian paramilitary police in Pulwama, part of Indian-controlled Kashmir

Pakistan-based Islamist group Jaish-e-Mohammad claimed responsibility for the attack, which was the deadliest in the region for 30 years.

An Indian pilot shot down over Pakistan has been released by Prime Minister Imran Khan as a 'peace gesture' today as the countries' leaders attempt to avoid growing violence.

Relations reached a low on Monday night when India violated the Line of Control, the agreed border line in contested Kashmir, by jets to perform an airstrike on an alleged Jaish-e-Mohammed terrorist training camp.

A map showing the military clout of Pakistan (left) and India (right) and the volatile disputed region of Kashmir to the north and Jammu and Kashmir to the south

Author Atif Tauqeer responded to Chopra's tweet expressing his disbelief that a UN ambassador 'can praise military actions'

A tweet by fatiymah asked the UN to 'take back their ambassadorship from Priyanka Chopra', describing her as a 'celebrity who fuels wars' and has no reason 'to be talking about human rights'

The strike was a retaliation for the deaths caused by the Pakistan-based group on Valentine's Day.

An online petition has been launched to strip Chopra of her UN Ambassadorship, gaining 50,000 signatures at the time of writing.

The petition claims that Chopra 'doesn't deserve to be a UN ambassador' after 'expressing her nationalism' by supporting the Indian Army.

Chopra had previously visited Rohingya and Syrian refugee camps as part of her partnership with UNICEF.
