Indian pilot RELEASED: First picture of Pakistan-captured fighter pilot walking free

India Pakistan: Captured pilot freed by military on Wagah border

top stories direct to your inbox SUBSCRIBE Invalid email Sign up to receive our rundown of the day'sdirect to your inbox We use your sign-up to provide content in ways you've consented to and to improve our understanding of you. This may include adverts from us and 3rd parties based on our understanding. You can unsubscribe at any time. More info

Parents of the pilot headed to the Wagah border, where Islamabad's authorities said he would be brought to, to witness his release and welcome him back. The pilot, named by India as Wing Commander Abhinandan, crashed his jet in Pakistani territory on Wednesday after a dogfight with Pakistani JF-17. The pilot's return was announced on Friday morning by Pakistan's foreign minister Shah Mahmood Qureshi.

He said: "As a gesture of peace and to de-escalate matters, the Indian pilot who is under arrest with us will be released today in the afternoon at the Wagah border." However, tensions between India and Pakistan remain high. Mr Qureshi has refused to attend a meeting of foreign ministers from the Organisation of Islamic Cooperation in Abu Dhabi, taking place this weekend, because his Indian counterpart has been invited. The minister added the Saudi foreign minister is set to visit his country bearing a message from Crown Prince Mohammed Bin Salman, who visited both Pakistan and India last month. READ MORE: Indian Prime Minister Modi’s party predicts HUGE BOOST in elections after Pakistan ATTACKS

Pakistan has released Wing Commander Abhinandan

The Indian pilot captured by Pakistan on Wednesday has been released

The released pilot quickly became a hero in his county after he shouted pro-Indian slogan while on enemy soil and attempted to evade capture twice in two days. On his first attempt, the pilot fired his pistol in the air to deter the Pakistani villagers chasing him, two eyewitnesses told Reuters. Muhammad Razzaq Chaudhry, 58, one of the eyewitnesses, said: "During that half a kilometre run, he fired some more gunshots in the air as well, to frighten the guys but to no avail. "Then he jumped into a small stream. Then, he realised that he could not escape, he took out some documents and maps from his uniform and tried to swallow some, tear apart and immerse the rest."

People waiting for the release of the pilot on the Wagah border

The other witness, Abdul Majeed, 40, added some of the villagers "trashed him" because "he was giving us a hard time". They later handed him over to the Pakistani army personnel. The latest clash between India and Pakistan sparked after a suicide car bombing killed at least 40 Indian paramilitary police officers in the contended territory of Kashmir on February 14. India responded by launching an airstrike to attack a major training camp of Jaish-e Mohammad, the militant group who claimed responsibility for the attack. While Prime Minister Narendra Modi's Government had announced the destruction of the camp, but members of the opposition have been requesting in the past days to provide evicende of the extent of the success of the mission.

Narendra Modi, India's Prime Minister
