Intense contest on the cards in DMK stronghold of Tiruvarur

AIADMK and AMMK are gearing up to mount a strong challenge

The byelection to the Tiruvarur Assembly constituency is expected to be an intense, multi-cornered contest as the ruling AIADMK and the Amma Makkal Munnetra Kazhagam (AMMK) are gearing up to mount a strong challenge to the DMK and end its dominance in the constituency.

Former DMK leader and Chief Minister M. Karunanidhi had fortified his home turf by defeating his AIADMK rivals by huge margins of 50,249 and 68,366 votes in 2011 and 2016, respectively. Prior to that, when Tiruvarur was a reserved constituency, the party’s candidates had won the seat in consecutive elections in 1996, 2001 and 2006. The Communist Party of India (Marxist), which used to hold sway in the constituency, winning four elections between 1980 and 1991, is now in the DMK’s camp. The DMK had won here in 1971 and 1977 as well.

Party president M.K. Stalin would be keen on starting the New Year on a winning note and, more importantly, repairing the damage the DMK had suffered in the wake of its defeat in the R.K. Nagar bypoll.

Given the political significance of the byelection, former Minister and Tiruchi heavyweight K.N. Nehru was nominated as the election in-charge for the constituency. Mr. Nehru has already begun the spadework in Tiruvarur.

The campaign would revolve around issues concerning agriculture, especially in the aftermath of Cyclone Gaja, and farmers’ agitations against the hydrocarbon exploration plans of the Centre and Karnataka’s move to build a dam across the Cauvery at Mekedatu. The Opposition would be looking to turn up the heat on the ruling party on these issues.

But Food Minister R. Kamaraj, the lone AIADMK candidate to win from the district in 2016, asserted that the party would achieve a “historic victory” in the byelection. The people, he said, were aware that the State government still had three years left in its term, and could address the needs of the constituency.

Hoping for an encore

With its support base in the Mannargudi belt, the AMMK is hoping for an encore of its performance in R.K. Nagar. “It will be a repeat of R.K. Nagar. The AIADMK will lose its deposit and the main fight will be between us and the DMK,” said S. Kamaraj, Tiruvarur district secretary of the AMMK. He asserted that although Tiruvarur was known to be a DMK stronghold, the situation had changed after the death of its leader Karunanidhi.

With a few other parties expected to enter the fray, the high-stakes battle could kick up much political heat and dust.
