More rallies staged in KP to condemn Indian aggression

PESHAWAR: More rallies were staged on Friday across Khyber Pakhtunkhwa against India and in support of the armed forces.

Separate processions were taken out in the provincial capital by political parties and traders.

The Jamaat-e-Islami leaders and workers launched the Tahaffuz-e-Pakistan March. Holding banners and placards, the JI leaders and activists gathered at the Kutchehri Gate.

Speaking on the occasion, the JI leaders condemned Indian aggression and vowed to render sacrifices for protection of the country.

Also, the traders and the Jamiat Ulema-e-Islam-Fazal activists staged a rally at Namakmandi in support of the armed forces.

MANSEHRA: The rallies were taken out in upper parts of Hazara in support of the armed forces and against Indian aggression.

The rallies were taken in Kohistan, Torghar districts and parts of Mansehra, Darband, Oghi, Balakot, Shinkiari and Jabori.

The protesters marched through roads and raised slogans against Indian Prime Minister Narendra Modi.

Meanwhile, the Rescue 1122 has launched its operation to cope with any untoward situation in Mansehra district.

The rescue 1122 squad equipped with ambulances, medicines and medical team and other necessities were stationed at the New Circuit House.

MARDAN: Dozens of Paramedics and other staff of Mardan Medical Complex and District Headquarters Hospital came out in support of armed forces. Carrying banners and placards, the rally participants chanted slogans against the Indian aggression.

Addressing the rally, Sharafatullah Yousafzai, central president of All Pakistan Paramedics Staff Federation, and others condemned the Indian jingoism. The speakers lauded the Pakistan Air Force for shooting down the Indian aircraft.

LAKKI MARWAT: Separate rallies were taken out in Lakki, Naurang and Gandi localities in favour of Pak army and to condemn Indian aggression on Friday.

A good number Afghan nationals settled in Gandi Khan and Serai Gambila localities gathered in Gandi chowk on busy Indus Highway and took away a rally to express solidarity with armed forces of Pakistan. District naib nazim Haji Arab Khan led the rally which marched on different roads and converged at the starting point.

KHAR: Traders of Inayat Killay in Bajaur district on Friday staged a rally against Indian aggression and in support of the armed forces.

Led by Inayat Killay Bazaar president Haji Mohammad Zaman, the participants of the rally marched through various roads.

They were holding placards and banners inscribed with slogans against Indian Prime Minister Narendra Modi.

HANGU: The office-bearers of Jamiat Ulema-i-Islam-Fazl (JUI-F) protested against India.

Addressing the protesters, Maulana Abdul Jalil, Maulana Masoodur Rahman and others warned India that they were ready to sacrifices their lives for protecting the borders of the motherland.

GHALLANAI: Residents of various villages of Baizai Sub-Division district Mohmand organised rallies to condemn India and in favour of armed forces.

Speaking on the occasion JUI-F provincial amir Maulana Mohammad Arif Haqqani, former senator Hajiz Rashid Ahmad, Maulana Samiullah and others said Pakistan came into being in the name of Islam. They said that they will not tolerate any aggression of India against Pakistan.

SADDA: Activists of the JUI-F in Kurram district also held a rally to condemn India. The participants chanted slogans against India and appreciated the courage and valour of the armed forces.

TIMERGARA: To condemn Indian aggression and support the armed forces of Pakistan, members of civil society, trader bodies, students and workers of various political parties staged rallies in all parts of Lower Dir district including Chakdara, Khall, Rabat, Samarbagh, Talash and Timergara.

They were carrying banners and placards inscribed with slogans against India and in support of the armed forces of Pakistan.

The speakers appreciated a befitting and jaw-breaking response of Pakistan Air Force (PAF) to the violation of the Pakistan airspace by the Indian aircraft.

CHITRAL: Processions were taken out in several villages in the district to condemn Indian aggression and in support of the armed forces.

A large number of people attended the rallies despite rain and a severe cold.
