‘Expecting peace gesture from Modi self-deception’

LAHORE: Rallies and demonstrations observed “Yaume Tahafuz-e-Pakistan” (security of Pakistan Day) across the country on the appeal of Jamaat-e-Islami ameer Senator Sirajul Haq.

The JI workers gathered after Friday prayers to express complete solidarity with the armed forces. The JI was scheduled to launch mass contact campaign from March 1 to create public awareness against corruption, lawlessness and other issues but it turned into Tahafuz-e-Pakistan movement in view of war threats from India.

Sirajul Haq while delivering Friday sermon at Mansoora masjid warned that expecting India under Modi to move towards peace with Pakistan was sheer self-deception. Therefore, instead of adopting a defensive posture, Pakistan should go to the world community for help in resolving Kashmir issue. He warned the world that India and Pakistan had fought three wars over Kashmir issue and the threat of a fourth war would remain alive until the Kashmir issue was resolved.

Sirajul Haq said according to the division formula of the sub-continent, Kashmir was a part of Pakistan but India sent its forces in Kashmir and occupied it by force. He said Kashmiris had been struggling for liberation for the last 70 years. The Indian forces had tried every tactic to crush the liberation movement but had failed. He said in fact, Kashmiris were fighting the war of the completion of Pakistan and small children as well as the elderly Kashmiris were engaged in this struggle. He said that the Pakistan government should stand fully behind the Kashmiris and adopt a firm and permanent policy in this regard.

Siraj welcomed the government decision not to attend the OIC meeting since Indian foreign minister was invited there despite Pakistan’s protests and said it was a matter of shame to invite India as a guest of honour at the Islamic world’s forum. He said instead of looking towards the colonial powers, we should show our trust in Allah. He condemned India’s ban on Jamaat-e-Islami in Held Kashmir and said this proved India’s defeated outlook. He said that the JI would not come to an end but Modi government would soon cease to exist.

Earlier, addressing the Talent Award ceremony of Jamiat-e-Talaba Arabia at Mansoora, JI Secretary General Liaqat Baloch said India’s jingoism, its craze for supremacy in the region and the violation of minorities’ fundamental rights were at peak and the war beginning on the pretext of the Pulwama incident was going to end up in India’s destruction. He said entire Pakistani nation stood behind its armed forces and the government was not alone in the face of enemy aggression. He said Indian pilot’s release was a good decision but it would have been better if it was reciprocated with the release of Kashmiris leadership and the end of brutalities in Held Kashmir.

Liaqat Baloch said peace was essential for regional development but the importance of US withdrawal from Afghanistan and the grant of Kashmiris their right to self-determination could not be underestimated in the present changed situation.
