Senate questions ‘hurry’ in releasing Indian pilot

ISLAMABAD: The government was asked in the Senate Friday to ponder over the on-going tense situation with its eastern neighbour in the backdrop of India-Israel military and economic nexus and the United States long-cherished dream to make India the ‘policeman’ of the region.

Similarly, joint opposition called on the government to share the details of urgency in announcing the release of captured Indian Air Force pilot and what Prime Minister Imran Khan wanted from India, as he made several attempts for telephonic contact with his counterpart Prime Minister Narendra Modi. They slammed him for not showing even courtesy to attend Prime Minister’s call or return the call for just saying ‘thank you’ on pilot’s release.

Some senators were worried about the lukewarm response of Pakistan’s friends in the given critical situation while Islamabad had been sending its delegations at the time of crises in those countries. They called for a foreign policy review.

Taking part in the discussion on the on-going Pak-India tension, former chairman Senate Mian Raza Rabbani said the government as well as the Senate and the National Assembly should also discuss the India-Israel nexus in military and economic fields, which kept on growing in recent years.

It was correct, he noted that Modi wanted poll campaign by mounting tensions with Pakistan but also this should be taken into consideration that since long, the United States had a dream of making India this region’s policeman and through, it contain China. And, he continued, the Pulwama incident could also not be seen in isolation.

To substantiate his contention, he also referred to RAW’s subversive acts inside Pakistan, India’s hostilities across the Line of Control, its decision not to come to the Saarc summit, which was to be held in Pakistan that they could not come to Islamabad under the shadow of terrorism and India’s constant propaganda that there were safe heavens for terrorists here, which was a white lie.

Speaking in the Senate, PPP Senator Sherry Rehman supported the decision to free the Indian pilot but asked what was the hurry to send the Indian pilot back, as India did not even bother to call or show any intent to have a Kashmir dialogue. Even the nikah preformed secretly was not valid, she said. “This latest crisis showed that Pakistan is not only politically more mature but is strategically superior to India. But what has Pakistan asked for? This is hard politics. Consider what India would have done in response to the pilot release. The government should share the cause of urgency of pilot release and conditions for India,” she emphasised.

Senators Sherry and Mir Kabir Shahi asserted that India had committed aggression twice intruding into Pakistani territory and after Pakistan’s peace gesture, now the ball was in India’s court.

PPP Senator Abdul Rehman Malik said that the war syndrome of Indian Prime Minister Narendra Modi against Pakistan was not for his country but for the coming general elections and that he was sure that Pulwama incident was carried out by Modi government itself to pressurize Pakistan and to create a win-win situation for himself in elections.

Malik further said that he had thorough research paper from the history since 1999 when the Kargil tension was raised and after then BJP came into power and during the Kargil war in Year 1999, Indian Air force Pilot group captain Kambampati Nachiketa was apprehended by Pakistan Army and he was released eight days later as peace gesture.

He warned Modi that Pakistan armed forces are ever-vigilant and would surely respond more powerfully to any Indian aggression in self-defence. However, he noted that PM Imran Khan offered PM Modi to sit together and sort out our issues including the offer of the sharing of actionable intelligence and information but from India next day 12 fighters flew to attack and entered in Balakot violating our airspace and sovereignty.

Malik contended that this was the courtesy and response showed by India and PM of Pakistan day before yesterday offered once again to talk and response is given by holding the press conference by their three forces chiefs.

He strongly objected to seating Chairman Senate Muhammad Sadiq Sanjrani during the joint sitting on the front seats in the National Assembly, meant for ministers and insisted this was unacceptable and the rules might be changed. “Please, speak on the subject, don’t talk about the other House here,” Sanjrani urged him. Malik called for awarding the highest gallantry award to pilot Hasan Siddiqui, who had downed the Indian fighter jet.

PTI Senator Azam Swati appreciated the unity showed by all political parties and said they all stood united in defence of Pakistan side by side with the armed forces. He said Pulwama incident was staged to sabotage peace process in Afghanistan and undermine also the Kashmir freedom movement.

Senator Dr Ashok Kumar of the National Party regretted that lawmakers from all parties were given the chance to speak on the Pak-India situation during the joint sitting, but no lawmaker from the minorities was given opportunity to express solidarity at this critical time for Pakistan.

PML-N Senator Kamran Michael, who has been attending the current session after his production order was issued by chairman Senate, rose to allege that injustice was being meted out to him. He said that his matter should be seen by the House law committee, as to why a member of the Senate was arrested.

Senator Kamran urged the chair that he wanted justice and that NAB should not be given a free hand to arrest any lawmaker without concrete evidence and framing of reference. Other senators of the party, Javed Abbasi and Saleem Zia also supported him and said that it should be made sure that none be arrested without framing of a reference, and whose name was not in an FIR.

Senator Rabbani proposed to the chair that then chairman Senate had given a detailed ruling on the share of the federating units and the Centre with regards to gas and oil production. He urged that the chair should ask about the implementation status of that ruling and give it a time-frame for its implementation. The matter of denying due share of gas of Sindh was raised by PPP Senator Dr Sikandar.
