PA lauds army for befitting response to India

LAHORE: Punjab Assembly members from both sides of the political divide on Friday continued to praise the Pakistani armed forces for a befitting response to invading Indian Air Force planes and Prime Minister Imran Khan’s gaining a moral high ground over the Indian government by unconditionally releasing the Indian pilot.

Speaking on the point of order following the question hour, the members lauded the political and military leadership for neutralizing Indian aggressive designs that also received admiration from various leaders around the world. PML-N’s Waris Kallu praised the commendable unity displayed by the entire nation to back their armed forces for successfully defending the homeland. He said the Pakistani nation had always been unanimous for the defence of Pakistan and freedom of Kashmir. He also admired Prime Minister Imran Khan’s goodwill gesture of freeing the Indian pilot unconditionally, and termed it in line with the teachings of Islam. He said treating enemies and prisoners well has always been a Muslim tradition, but added the enemy designs in the war-like situation must be taken into consideration. He said Pakistan was showing grace but Indian PM Narendra Modi was claiming the release of their pilot a result of Indian pressure and Pakistan’s cowardice. He said the Indian threats and negative attitude was open before the world. He said the situation should serve as an eye-opener for the world community that Pakistan was going to great extent for ensuring peace in the region but the Indian leadership was bent upon thrusting war on Pakistan. He said that there was the need for taking all decisions after due consultation with the civil and military leadership. He said the effect of the release of the Indian pilot on the morale of Kashmiris should have been given due consideration.

Minister for Health Dr Yasmin Rashid said the world community was praising the Pakistani leadership for giving an unprecedented response to Indian aggression. She said the Indian war hysteria was visible to the world and sincere efforts of Pakistan for maintaining peace in the region. She said the prime minister had already conveyed the warning to India and the world community that if a war broke out the situation would not be in control of anyone. She said PM Imran Khan had literally slapped on the face of India by showing calm, a positive gesture and refrain from a tit-for-tat response to aggression. She said now India was facing an awkward situation on the diplomatic front. She said war was not in favor of anybody and only talks were a solution to all problems.

Replying to a supplementary query during the question hour, Minister for Industries, Commerce and Investment Mian Aslam Iqbal expressed sorrow that the government was clearing huge outstanding dues left behind by the previous regime. He said the PML-N government had issued cheques for Rs1,500 billion which were bounced due to the unavailability of funds. “Now we are clearing the backlog by making payments of the bounced cheques out of our meager resources”, he said. To another question, Mian Aslam Iqbal said 23 officers were working at consumers courts on contract. He said the officers were recruited through relevant selection committees as per the service rules. He said their cases for permanent posting would be sent to the Punjab Public Service Commission. He said the government was considering setting up consumer courts in districts lacking such facilities. He said the government was procuring land in different cities for setting up industrial estates. The session was adjourned till Monday at 3pm.
