UK outraged by Pulwama killings, our values superior to those of terror-backers: Boris Johnson to India

British MP and Brexiteer Boris Johnson said on Saturday said his fellow Britons were outraged by the suicide bombing that killed 40 Indian soldiers in Jammu and Kashmir last month.

Speaking at the India Today Conclave in New Delhi, Johnson said India and the UK would succeed in defeating terrorism, a common threat, for their values were superior to those of terrorists and their sponsors.

India blames Pakistan of involvement in the terrorist attack in Pulwama district of Jammu and Kashmir, and has said it conducted airstrikes on a Pakistani training camp of Jaish-e-Mohammed, which claimed responsibility to the bombing.

It said a day after conducting the operation in Balakot, in Khyber-Pakhtunkhwa province, that it had thwarted an attempt by Pakistani fighter jets to target its military installations.

"I'm sure I speak for millions of people in my own country when I say we stand that shoulder-to-shoulder with India in outrage at the killings in Pulwama, and in our determination to work with you to defeat the terrorist foe that threatens us both," Boris Johnson, a former mayor of London, said.

"And we will succeed, and we will defeat them because in the end, it is our values that are superior to those of the terrorists, and those who sponsor them."

Johnson said there was no doubt that the deep state in Pakistan "has been responsible, chronically, for association with sponsorship of terrorist groups".

He said the UK puts a "huge amount of pressure" on Pakistan, but admitted more pressure could be exerted though Britain's aid budget.

ABHINANDAN RETURNS, BORIS JOHNSON SAYS GOOD MOVE BY IMRAN

The return of an Indian pilot captured by Pakistan during a dogfight on Wednesday -- Wing Commander Abhinandan Varthaman -- has been greeted with joy.

"India is proud of your courage and sense of duty, and above all your dignity," said President Ram Nath Kovind as he welcomed Varthaman back home, leading India's tributes to the pilot.

"I happen to think that [Pakistan Prime Minister] Imran Khan, as far as I understand matters...behaved sensibly and prudently in deciding to release the pilot, and I think that was a good move," Boris Johson said.

"But he clearly faces a very, very difficult situation, and I think all of us who worry about what is going on there have got a real, real duty to support the civilian side of government in Pakistan" against the military and "deep state elements", Johnson said.
