Ganapati Hegde's art is ‘second’ to none!

It was as a kid that this Bengaluru based artist began his journey of collecting awards for his artworks. Ganapati Hegde, over the years has added a number of prestigious awards to his credit. He is currently showcasing over 60 plus paintings from his new

Coming from a family that is inclined to arts in its various forms, it was inevitable that Ganapati would have an inclination towards the fine arts. He says, “My entire tryst with art started when I received an international award in 8th standard that boosted my confidence. My interest in art was such that I ended drawing on the walls and floors as well.” Ganapati later went on to acquire a diploma in fine art from the Ken School of Art, Bengaluru.

“During my time at art school, my teacher cautioned me not to switch from fine arts to streams like multimedia and graphic design. But it is not possible to survive with a career like this,” he shares.

Therefore, Ganapati learnt graphic design and worked with some of the bigwigs of the IT industry before quitting his professional life to become a full time artist. An admirer of works of artists like A Ramachandran and Henri Rousseau, he adds, “Though I’m a city boy now, my inspiration comes from native, Kumta which is a coastal town in North Karnataka.”

For Ganapati, painting is the freedom of expression and also a visual representation of emotions and thoughts. Ganapati has also won a national award at the 13th Camilin Art Foundation and also won a Lalit Kala Academy Award.

Talking about his recent exhibition ‘Second Springs’, “These paintings are all about how you interpret nature in your own unique way. I have done over 60 plus paintings that took over a year to complete,” he shares. On his plans for the future, this avid traveller shares, “Painting for me is never a process and it is never planned. I only paint when I am inspired.” nd Springs. Talking to his artist, we find out more about his collection and his journey of becoming an artist.
