Umiya Mata Foundation will fight against Patel community's skewed sex ratio

Although the Patel community of Gujarat is one of the most socially and financially influential communities in the state, their skewed sex ratio happens to be a cause for concern. The situation is so bad that men from the Patel community do not find brides within the community. The community leaders have resolved to get rid of this problem in the coming years.

Vishwa Umiya Foundation, a community organisation of Kadva Patels taking shape at Jaspur village near Ahmedabad, has one of its listed objectives as overcoming the imbalance in sex ratio. As per the estimate, the sex ratio in the Patel community is 650 to 700 females as against 1,000 males. The ration in the state is 919 females against 1,000 males.

Coordinator of Vishwa Umiya Foundation RP Patel said, "It is a known fact that the Patel community has very poor sex ratio and many men do not find women within the community to get married. We, through this foundation, will make efforts to maintain a balance between the birth rate of males and females in the days to come."

"We will be counselling members of our community. We will motivate them to give birth to girl children and educate them. We are also going to form one Uma Sena under which our volunteers from every village will spread this message," Patel added.

The Vishwa Umiya Foundation has been carrying this activity and now the same will be taken up at a larger scale. The special sessions will be held at the venue of Vishwa Umiya Foundation once things become operational.

Patidar Anamat Andolan Samiti leader Hardik Patel also showed concern over the issue. He, however, advocated the idea that Patel men could marry Kurmi community women from Uttar Pradesh, Bihar, Odisha, Madhya Pradesh, and Maharashtra. Other organisations of the Patel community had also held mass marriages of males from Gujarat and Kurmi women from other states. Sources said, in many cases, Patel men were forced to pay tribal communities of the state to get a match.
