Parents against bill altering fee hike rule

Appalled by amendments to the Maharashtra Educational Institutions (Regulation of Fee) Act, 2011, tabled in the Assembly on February 28 and making use of the window provided by the cancellation of the session before they could be passed, agitated parents are launching a concerted campaign against the proposed changes that they fear will work against their interest.



The parents have pointed out that the amendment mandating 25 per cent of the parents have to be opposed to any fee hike, raising their voice in unison, for the issue to be taken up and other provision allowing schools the right to charge interest on parents holding back on the payment of the disputed fee, will empower the schools to raise fees at will. They also underscored that these two aspects were not part of the recommendations made by the state-appointed Justice (Retd) VG Palshikar Committee, which looked into the issue of fee hikes.



Advocate Satish Mundada, a parent who was part of the committee, reiterated, "Both the amendments were not in the Palshikar report. We've earlier sought for the amendment to be withdrawn. Now we will take it up with the Opposition party leaders so that they veto the bill when it comes up on June 17, in the monsoon session of the Assembly. If we are unable to swing the political will, we will resort to punching NOTA (none of the above) when casting our vote in the forthcoming elections."



The parents are toying with the idea of approaching Bombay High Court, should the bill be passed. Meanwhile, they've also taken to social media platforms to draw support from their fraternity. "We've started a social media campaign encouraging parents to build political pressure on the government to not persist with the bill in the Assembly. If this fails, NOTA will be our next resort," added advocate Anubha Srivastav, who has been fighting cases related to fee hikes for various parents.



The social media outreach has been able to rope in parents from Mumbai, Nashik and Aurangabad, besides Pune, to fight the tabled bill. "We initiated an online petition on Change.org and already there are 2,000 signatories," Mandada informed. Having exhausted their entreaties to the government official, the parents are convinced the only option left is to do some political lobbying. "Parents have met me on the issue of fee hike and the related bill earlier. However, I have not heard from them lately," saideducation commissioner Vishal Solanki. Meanwhile, the school education minister, Vinod Tawde, on the other hand, said that no parent had approached him on the issue to date.


