Congress hits back, says PM Modi spoke of everything except 2014 promises

Summary of Modiji’s ‘Monologue’ Interview:- ‘I’, ‘Me’, ‘Mine’, ‘Myself’ Country is suffering your ‘I’s & ‘Lies’! — Randeep Singh Surjewala (@rssurjewala) 1546351536000

PM Modi did not spare our people of his penchant for false promises, hollow claims and propaganda even on the New Y… https://t.co/GOkSEbTb25 — Anand Sharma (@AnandSharmaINC) 1546350460000

NEW DELHI: Congress on Tuesday dismissed Prime Minister Narendra Modi’s interview on New Year’s Day on grounds that he did not address his government’s “failure” to deliver on the promises it made in 2014, and that the BJP’s “wipe out” in the Hindi heartland states had now forced Modi to offer explanations.The party said it welcomed Modi’s assertion that the Supreme Court should decide the Ayodhya issue, but accused him of trying to obfuscate the matter by talking about an ordinance. “The case is pending in SC and whatever it decides should be adhered to and there is no need for an ordinance....I hope that the RSS and Mohan Bhagwat were watching the PM as he rejected his own party’s and RSS’s demand. We are happy that the PM stated that SC will decide the issue. But he also tried to confuse people that an ordinance will come, thereafter,” said Randeep Surjewala , Congress spokesperson.Alleging that Modi’s interview was full of rhetoric and had no mention of ground realities, Surjewala added that the PM should have focused instead on the sufferings his unilateral decisions like demonetisation and GST had caused to people. Congress questioned Modi’s silence on bank frauds, black money, failure to rein in terrorism and naxalism and farmers woes.Congress also warned the PM that he should call for a joint parliamentary probe into Rafale quickly. “Otherwise many secrets of the chowkidaar will be exposed,” Surjewala said. Adding that the PM had lied about there being no allegations of personal corruption against him, he said, “In fact, the Rafale deal is only about allegations of personal corruption against Modi.”Congress also referred to the PM’s interview as “Modiji's monologue” focusing on “I, Me, Mine, and Myself” while the country suffered at the hands of his “arrogance” and “self-obsession”.Senior Congress leader Anand Sharma also mounted an attack on the PM for attempting to “fool” people through a “fixed interview”, daring him, instead, to face Parliament and hold a press conference. “PM Modi did not spare our people of his penchant for false promises, hollow claims and propaganda even on the New Year day. The habitual peddler of untruths and lies has signalled a nasty narrative for the 2019 election campaign....Having betrayed people, do not beg Lord Ram to save you. He did not ask you to lie in the first place,” Sharma tweeted.Congress also accused Modi of politicising the Indian armed forces. “Let me remind you that PM Modi did not acknowledge the historic contribution of Smt Indira Gandhi in the liberation of Bangladesh and the surrender of Pakistani army. The task of guiding troops is best left to our brave commanders,” Sharma said.
