Dipika Kakar threatened with acid attack. Here's what Sreesanth's wife Bhuvneshwari has to say

Bigg Boss 12 winner actress Dipika Kakar was recently threatened of an acid attack by a Sreesanth fan on Twitter. The fan expressed his immense dislike for the actress and said that if he ever comes to Mumbai, he will throw acid on her. Dipika's fans took note and informed the Mumbai police. They tweeted, "Dear @MumbaiPolice this guy is threatening to throw acid on lady. Please arrest him early as possible. Please RT and Spread so this post can reach to @MumbaiPolice."

The Twitter handle of the person issuing threats to Dipika was named as 'Sreesanth ka real fan' but looks like Sree's wife Bhuvneshwari Kumari isn't convinced and smells foul. She took to Twitter regarding the same and wrote, "My dear #SreeFam, came to know about the Acid attack news yesterday. We want to tell you all that Me and Sree are very sure that no one from #SreeFam can ever write such a thing & we believe You all. It could be any one portraying as Sreefam." (sic)

My dear #SreeFam,came to know about the Acid attack news yesterday.We want to tell you all that Me and Sree are very sure that no one from #SreeFam can ever write such a thing & we believe You all. It could be any one portraying as Sreefam. January 7, 2019





Bhuvneshwari was super-active on Twitter while her husband was locked inside the BB 12 house and thanked Sreesanth fans for their constant love and support. She believes SreeFam can't stoop so low. She even wrote that other fandoms also get abusive. "There had been a lot of abusive and worst tweets for us as well from other fandoms. I know we have no control over what some people write. Some online reviewers pick it up solely because we refuse to give interview on their channel. I know my Sreefam and our trust for you remains strong," she tweeted.

Ther had been a lot of abusive nd worst tweets for us as well frm other fandoms. I knw we have no control over what some ppl write.Some online reviewers pick it up solely because We refuse to give interview on their channel. I knw my Sreefam nd our trust for you remains strong. Bhuvneshwari Sreesanth (@Bhuvneshwarisr1) January 7, 2019




