Indo-Pak tensions may increase BJP’s chances in polls: Mobius

Why D-Street thinks border flareup improved Modi’s prospects in forthcoming elections? Here is from a market veteran Amisha Vora, Owner & Joint MD, Prabhudas Liladher, says while administration has been very good under PM Modi, businesses have not flourished much

The skirmish between India and Pakistan seems to have strengthened the popularity of Indian Prime Minister Narendra Modi , said emerging markets veteran Mark Mobius . Modi-led BJP will return to power for a second term this May, when general elections will be conducted in India, said the founder of Mobius Capital Partners.India conducted air strike in Pakistan last week and in response to that Pakistan crossed the Line of Control. Escalating tensions had sparked heightened volatility in the Indian markets as well as other overseas markets.“The interesting aspect is that despite the negative situation with regards to Kashmir this particular incident seems to strengthen Modi’s popularity because he stands for Indian nationalism etc. That is sort of positive aspect as far as the market is concerned, because he gets stronger majority and is able to take office without having to have coalition or have coalition partners having too much power,” said Mobius, former executive chairman of Templeton Emerging Markets Group in an interview with ET. “Then the reform movement can continue and that would be good for investors,” said Mobius.The satta market as of last week was betting that the BJP would win 260-270 seats in the upcoming general election. This figure stood at around 230 seats just after the interim budget on February 1, when the government presented a pro-rural budget.“I am confident that he will return. I was always confident even before this incident,” said Mobius. “It is not only this incident but other things that he is doing before the election that is increasing his popularity,” he said.Volatility in Indian markets heightened after the conflict between India and Pakistan intensified. Mobius is confident that India has strong prospects despite underperforming other emerging markets. “We still think India has better potential than China,” he said.Mobius is not perturbed by the likely fall in India’s weight in the MSCI Emerging Market Index.India’s weight in the index is likely to fall at least by a percentage point in the next one year, causing an expected outflow of as much as $2billion to $3 billion investment by passive funds. Increase in representation of Chinese mainland shares, addition of Argentina and Saudi Arabia, a modification in the calculation methodology for foreign ownership limits are the events that are going to affect India’s weight.“I personally think that this whole index thing is very bad for investors in many ways because it sort of distorts the picture but that’s fine. It is going to have an impact but the greater flows of foreign money going into emerging markets will even that out,” said Mobius. Mobius is bullish on industrials, non-banking institutions and consumer stocks.“We have seen transformation taking place in some particular stocks that are moving into the general banking area and taking advantage of the low-cost deposits so that’s one area where we are quite interested,” he said.
