Nara Lokesh accuses PM Modi, KCR, Jagan Reddy of targeting firms offering IT services to TDP

Hyderabad: Andhra Pradesh IT Minister Nara Lokesh on Sunday accused Prime Minister Narendra Modi, Telangana Chief Minister K Chandrasekhar Rao and YSRCP president Jaganmohan Reddy of targeting companies that offer IT services to the ruling Telugu Desam Party (TDP) in the state.

Taking to Twitter, Lokesh said: “With no guts to face @ncbn directly, with evil politricks failing to stop the development of AP, with all the lies & spreading of rumours failing to stop the construction of Amaravati, the 3 Modis (Modi, KCR & Jagan) are now targeting companies that offer IT services to the TDP.”

The minister also accused the Telangana Police of harassing the companies that have been said to be hired to curate the information whose complete rights are held by the party.

“They are trying hard to steal the information of the registered party members and Seva Mitras. The Telangana Police are harassing the companies that have been hired to curate the information whose complete rights are held by the party,” Lokesh claimed in a series of tweets.

“Kidnapping the employees, harassing their families and threatening them with dire consequences…aren’t the triumvirate of Modi-KCR-Jagan ashamed of using the executive powers for stealing?,” he said.

Continuing his attack, Lokesh said that Prime Minister Modi and KCR are trying to benefit Reddy by allegedly employing devious means.

“By employing devious means, Modi and KCR are trying to benefit YS Jagan. Remember Newton’s 3rd Law? Dictator @narendramodi’s direction, Factionist Jagan’s overaction and Fascist KCR’s plan of Action will get an equal and opposite reaction from the people!” he said.

Meanwhile, the complainant Lokeshwara Reddy has been brought to the Cyberabad Commissionerate. According to VC Sajjanar, Commissioner of Police, Cyberabad Commissionerate, Lokeshwara had registered a complaint with the Madhapur Police and Cyber Crimes, Cyberabad.

A case has also been registered under relevant sections of the Indian Penal Code (IPC) against four persons, Bhaskar, Phani, Chandrasekhar, and Vikram Goud, who were running IT Grid Company. It is alleged that they were involved in data theft.

“As of now, the case is under investigation. We can give clear details only after the investigation. We have served notices to the four persons and called them to the police station as part of the investigation,” Sajjanar said.

Andhra Pradesh Finance Minister Yanamala Ramakrishnudu has slammed BJP, YSRCP, and TRS for conspiring against the state.

“Prime Minister Narendra Modi is now Rafale Modi. Biggest defence scam in India took place during Modi’s tenure only. The Defence Ministry never faced so much big corruption allegations,” he said.

“Earlier it was Rs 31,000 crore scam. But now the Rafale scam has touched the figure of Rs 63,000 crore. Till date, no Prime Minister faced such huge corruption allegations. He should speak about “Bhrashtachaar Ki Baat” instead of “Mann Ki Baat,” said Ramakrishnudu.

TDP president and Chief Minister N Chandrababu Naidu on Sunday also alleged that whosoever speaks against Prime Minister Modi faces the Enforcement Directorate (ED) and Income Tax (I-T) raids.

“Whosoever speaks against Prime Minister Modi faces I-T and ED raids. We will not be afraid of all these acts. We will fight for justice until we achieve it. I am speaking on behalf of 5 crore people. I will not tolerate any injustice to Telugus residing in any part of the world,” he said.

After the Hyderabad Police raided the office of the mobile app developer, Chief Minister Naidu claimed that this was done after YSRCP leader Vijay Sai Reddy complained, and also accused the opposition of stealing data.

“We are using a mobile application to get all updates from the party workers. The Hyderabad Police recently raided the offices of a mobile app developer, just because YSR Congress Party leader Vijay Sai Reddy complained. They just want to steal our data. I am asking the police why they are harassing us in Hyderabad. Who gave them the right to torture us,” asked Naidu.

[source_without_link]ANI[/source_without_link]
