Top 5 quotes: Air Chief Marshal BS Dhanoa's first address after IAF's Balakot strike

New Delhi:

Air Chief Marshal BS Dhanoa on Monday said that the target was 'clearly hit' when Indian Air Force (IAF) struck Jaish-e-Mohammed’s terror camp in Balakot. The Indian Air Force on February 26 conducted an air strike on a Jaish-e-Mohammed (JeM) terrorist camp in Pakistan’s Balakot to avenge the Pulwama attack. At least 40 CRPF personnel were killed last month in one of the deadliest terror attacks in Jammu and Kashmir when a Jaish suicide bomber rammed a vehicle carrying over 30 kg of explosives into their bus in Pulwama district that also left many critically wounded. More than 2,500 Central Reserve Police Force personnel, many of them returning from leave to rejoin duty in the Valley, were travelling in the convoy of 78 vehicles when they were ambushed on the Srinagar-Jammu highway at Latoomode in Awantipora in south Kashmir. It was the first time in more than a decade that Indian jets had crossed the LoC to strike against Pakistan. The Indian Air Force hit Jabha Top, a forested hilltop where the Jaish-e-Mohammed had its camp.

It was the first time in more than a decade that Indian jets had crossed the LoC to strike against Pakistan. The Indian Air Force hit Jabha Top, a forested hilltop where the Jaish-e-Mohammed had its camp.



Top 5 quotes of Air Chief Marshal BS Dhanoa



The target has been clearly amplified by the Foreign Secretary in his statement. We hit our target. The air force doesn’t calculate casualty numbers, the government does that. We count what targets we have hit.

One is a planned operation in which you plan and carry out an attack. But when an adversary does a strike on you, every available aircraft goes in, irrespective of which aircraft it is. All aircraft are capable of fighting the enemy.

Happy Abhinandan is back. Whether he flies or not depends on his medical fitness. That's why post-ejection, he has undergone a medical check-up. Whatever treatment is required, will be given. Once we get his medical fitness, he will get into the fighter cockpit.

The Mig-21 Bison is a capable aircraft, it has been upgraded, it has better radar, air-to-air missiles, and better weapons system.

The Air Force has to get its act together and find out what caused the mid-air clash ahead of the opening of the Bengaluru air show on February 19 and helicopter crash in Kashmir last week.

For all the Latest India News, Download News Nation Android and iOS Mobile Apps.
