Imran Khan: I am not worthy of the Nobel Peace Prize

Pakistan Prime Minister Imran Khan said on Monday he wasn't worthy of the Nobel Peace Prize, after a resolution submitted in Pakistan's top law-making body said he deserved the coveted honour.

"The person worthy of this would be the one who solves the Kashmir dispute according to the wishes of the Kashmiri people and paves the way for peace and human development in the subcontinent," Imran Khan tweeted to over 9 million followers on Monday morning.

It was Khan's own information minister, Fawad Chaudry, who submitted the resolution in parliament this weekend, saying Pakistan's leader had played a "sagacious role" in reducing tensions between Islamabad and New Delhi.

I am not worthy of the Nobel Peace prize. The person worthy of this would be the one who solves the Kashmir dispute according to the wishes of the Kashmiri people and paves the way for peace & human development in the subcontinent. Imran Khan (@ImranKhanPTI) March 4, 2019

Tweets with #NobelPeaceForImranKhan pointed to the release of Wing Commander Abhinandan Varthaman, an Indian fighter pilot captured by Pakistan during a dogfight last week. Although Imran Khan called it a "peace gesture", the Indian Air Force said it was "in consonance with the Geneva Conventions".

Upon his return, Wing Commander Varthaman said he underwent mental harassment in Pakistan but was not physically tortured, ANI reported citing unnamed sources.

'WHEN YOU SUPPRESS REALITY...'

India and Pakistan appeared to come to the brink of war last week after India sent Mirage 2000 fighters to bomb a Jaish-e-Mohammed training camp in Khyber-Pakhtunkhwa province. New Delhi said the strike was pre-emptive and non-military, but it was widely seen as revenge for the killing of 40 Indian soldiers in southern Kashmir.

Pakistan responded. A day after the counter-terrorism operation, India said it had thwarted an attempt by Pakistani jets to target its military installations. It was in that aerial confrontation that Wing Commander Abhinandan was captured.

At the India Today Conclave on Saturday, senior BJP leader Ram Madhav responded to talk of a Nobel Prize for Imran Khan by decrying Islamabad's use of terrorism as a state policy.

And when Union Minister Arun Jaitley was asked for his reaction, he said: "I have absolutely no reaction to it."

"When you suppress reality and live in a world without complete information, these are the inevitable consequences," he said.
