Rangpur city turns volatile since beginning of March, 1971

By Mamun Islam

RANGPUR, March 4, 2019 (BSS) – The city of Rangpur literally turned

volatile since March 1 when hatred Pakistani President General Yahiya Khan

cancelled the scheduled parliament session on March 3, 1971 and declared

curfew on the day.

The people of Rangpur started showing stiff resistance against the

Pakistani junta instantly after Father of the Nation Bangabandhu Sheikh

Mujibur Rahman called strike on March 2 in Dhaka and on March 3 throughout

the country.

“A meeting of student leaders was held at ‘Panga House’ in the city on

March 2, 1971 to chalk out next strategies with Chhatra League leader Rafikul

Islam Golap in the chair,” General Secretary of district ‘Ghatok Dalal Nirmul

Committee’ Mosaddek Hossain Lablu said.

“At late night on March 2, student leader Abdur Rouf came to Rangpur Press

Club from the meeting and informed local journalists that were no alternative

to launch decisive movements at the call of Bangabandhu,” Lablu added.

Awami League (AL) leaders Siddik Hossain, Advocate Abdul Gani, Shah Abdur

Razzaque, Advocate Gazi Rahman, Tayebur Rahman, Mir Anisul Haque Payara and

others went to different areas in the city for further strengthening

movement.

“Thousands of people brought out protest processions breaking curfew on

March 3 in the morning on the city streets,” said immediate past Commander of

district unit Command of Bangladesh Muktijoddha Sangshad Mosaddek Hossain

Bablu.

Originating from Katchari Bazaar and many other points of the city, student

leaders brought out curfew-breaking spontaneous processions those were

attended by hundreds of leaders and workers of AL, other political parties

and common people.

At one stage, non-Bengali Behari Sarforaz Khan opened gunfire from his

house on the procession in Alamnagar area at 9am when class-seven student

Sangku Samajhder, 12, was critically injured.

“Sangku glorified the people of Rangpur as well as the whole Bangalee

nation through sacrificing his life for independence of the country at 9:30am

on March 3 in 1971,” Bablu said.

The Behari people also shot dead college student Abul Kalam Azad and

stabbed government employee Omar Ali to death on March 3, 1971 while another

injured student Shariful Alam alias Mokbul later died at Hospital after one

month.

“And thus, the people of Rangpur sacrificed four brave sons while breaking

the curfew at the call of Bangabandhu along with the country’s many other

heroic sons on March 3, 1971,” Bablu added.

President of Rangpur unit of ‘Ghatok Dalal Nirmul Committee’ Dr Mofizul

Islam Mantu said the Pakistani junta got frightened witnessing unprecedented

heroism of the Bangalees when Rangpur sacrificed lives on March 3, 1971.

“Noticing insuperable heroism among Rangpur people since beginning of

volatile March, the Pakistani occupation forces started cleansing local

intellectuals along with innocent Bangalees here,” he said.

The Pakistani hyenas with local collaborators caught 11 brilliant Bangalee

intellectuals from their houses here on March 27, 1971 in a pre-planned

manner.

“The occupation forces forcibly took them to Rangpur cantonment and

conducted barbaric physical torture on them causing unbearable pains for

their active role in noncooperation movement,” Lablu said.

Fearing threat of patriotism from the intellectuals, the occupation forces

with collaborators took them to ‘Dakhiganj Shwashan Baddhyabhumi’ in the city

on April 4, 1971 and gunned them down to make the Bangalee nation talentless.

Incredibly, one of them, then Awami League leader Dr Dinesh Chandra

Bhowmick alias Mantu Daktar, escaped death and later, he joined the ‘Mukti

Bahini’ after getting proper treatments in neighbouring India.

“Genocides of ten intellectuals instantly triggered heroism in every Rangpur

people inspiring them to launch stiff resistance for independence,” Mantu

added.

Like in other places, the occupation forces with local collaborators

committed horrific crimes against humanity through genocide of 1,200 innocent

Bangalees at Padmapukur and Jharuarbeel areas Badarganj upazila here on April

17, 1971.

Freedom fighter Md. Abdus Sattar of Badarganj upazila said the whole area

turned into mass slaughtering ground when fresh bloods of the innocent

Bangalees turned the grasses and waters there into red.

“The occupation forces got frightened witnessing heroism of three martyred

sons of Rangpur on March 3, ten intellectuals on April, martyrdoms of 1,200

Bangalees on April 17, 1971 and started conducting indiscriminate genocides

in the region,” Sattar added.

The indiscriminate genocides ignited heroism in every Bangalee when

hundreds of people joined the ‘Mukti Bahini’, created fierce resistance

against the occupation forces and fought till achieving the independence on

December 16, 1971.
