Days before IAF bombed Jaish camp in Balakot, NTRO confirmed around 300 active targets in facility

Days before the Indian Air Force (IAF) carried out a major airstrike to eliminate a Jaish-e-Mohammed (JeM) training camp in Balakot, the National Technical Research Organisation (NTRO) revealed that there were 300 active mobile connections in the terror outfit's training facility in Balakot, reported news agency ANI.

While it was reported that around 250-300 terrorists were killed in the IAF airstrike in Balakot, many have raised questions over the exact number of terrorists killed in the aftermath.

Pakistan continues to claim that the airstrike in Balakot only damaged a nearby house and the forest surrounding Jabba Top, where the terror camp was located.

Sources: NTRO surveillance of JeM Balakot camp in days leading up to air strike by IAF confirmed around 300 active mobile connections in facility pic.twitter.com/uwyzd0qpHB ANI (@ANI) March 4, 2019

Sources told ANI that NTRO surveillance of JeM's camp in Balakot revealed the presence of 300 active mobile connections in the facility.

They further said that the number of active targets was corroborated by other Indian intelligence agencies, suggesting the same number of operatives in JeM's terror camp.

While some ministers have already started using the numbers during public addresses, there has been no official word on how many people were eliminated in the airstrike carried out at around 3:30 am.

On Monday, Air Chief Marshall BS Dhanoa made it clear that the IAF was in no position to comment on the number of militants killed in the airstrike at Jaish camp in Balakot.

He added that it was the government's job to determine the exact figure and that it is not the job of the Air Force to count the number of human causalities.

In his response to those refuting India's version of the airstrike, Dhanoa said Indian jets had hit their targets.

"If we plan to hit the target, we hit the target. If we had dropped bombs in the jungle, then no need for him [Pakistan] to respond," he added.
