Will act against perpetrators of terror sitting across border: PM Modi

‘Country has run out of patience and is ready to beat them in their own house’

Prime Minister Narendra Modi on Monday warned that India would hunt down terrorists wherever they may be hiding.

“The country has run out of patience with terrorism and now it is prepared to retaliate and beat them (terrorists) in their own house,” Mr. Modi said, addressing a function here.

Inaugurating a new building of a civil hospital, ravaged by serial blasts in 2008 in which 56 people were killed, he said, no terrorist would be spared “even if they hide in the bowels of the earth.”

“The bullets of terrorists have repeatedly pierced the heart of India but those indulging in vote bank politics hardly cared to take any action. I am not worried about chair or power. I care for my country and its people and their security and will do anything to protect them,” he said. “This country will not sit silent even if the perpetrators are sitting on the other side of the border,” the Prime Minister said.

Opposition under attack

He criticised the leaders of Opposition parties and asked why the previous government did not take any action when serial blasts were carried out by the terrorists and when Mumbai was attacked in September 2008. “I will not spare a single person after the Pulwama attack. Those calling the recent air strikes election gimmick must not forget that we did surgical strikes when no election was in sight,” he said.

Earlier in Jamnagar also Mr. Modi attacked the Opposition and said, “If the IAF had Rafales during the recent air strikes, the results would have been different.”

“If the IAF had Rafales to fly in while conducting the air strikes, it would not have lost any fighter jet and at the same time, it would not have spared any of theirs (Pakistan’s). This is my simple calculation,” he said.

“In my speech in Delhi recently, I had said our jawans had shown valour and bravery and the country was proud of their achievements. I said if they had Rafales now, the results would have been different. What is wrong in this statement? Why can’t they comprehend a simple statement of mine,” he asked. “They (Opposition) have problem with everything I do. They want to eliminate Modi, I want to eliminate terrorism.”
