'Terrorist' Modi spews more venom against Pakistan at election rally in a bid to get more votes

NEW DELHI - Indian Premier Narendra Modi is on a spree of venom-spewing against Pakistan these days to garner public support for the upcoming election, allying more with the image of a 'terrorist' than a politician.

Addressing an election rally in Ahmedabad on Monday, the Indian prime minister expressed that we [India] will enter your territory and eliminate you, defying norms of international relations, diplomacy and sovereignty.

LIVE | Will enter your territory and strike terror: PM Modi sends a warning like never before at a rally in Ahmedabad, Gujarat pic.twitter.com/1Qv1tV2Z38 — Republic (@republic) March 4, 2019

"It is my nature to give a fitting reply. Even if they hide deep under the Earth, I will drag them out and eliminate them," Modi bragged in a blunt warning.

The BJP leader also fired a broadside at the opposition parties which are accusing the ruling BJP of using the air strikes to garner votes.

"Was there any election when we conducted the surgical strike for the first time? We have been affected by terrorism for the last 40 years... I don't care for power. I am only concerned about my country's security," Modi said referring to the strikes for which New Delhi did not provide any evidence.

Narendra Modi, who suffered a blow at the hands of Pakistan Air Force last week, seems to be whipping up war hysteria intentionally to win public support as anti-Pakistan sentiment somewhat helps the Indian masses decide as to whom they should vote.

PAF shoots down two Indian fighter jets inside ... 10:39 AM | 27 Feb, 2019 MUZAFFARABAD – Two Pakistan Air Force jets targeted two Indian warplanes in a dogfight and shot them down along the ...

The BJP or the 'Saffron' party has been accused of using armed forces to secure victory in the state polls for which Modi seems worried, considering the election results for the states of Madhya Pradesh, Rajasthan, and Chhattisgarh.

Modi's much promised 'achhe din' are apparently not satisfying the public for which the Indian premier is visibly trying to use another card of ultra-nationalism and anti-Pakistan sentiments.

The Indian premier is under a pressure to release evidence that it struck a terror camp in Balakot area of Pakistan in a recently claimed surgical strike. The pressure has been ramped up as Pakistan Air Force shot down two fighter jets of India Air Force last week and captured a pilot Abhinandan alive as well.

Though Modi claims to be a political leader, his threats somewhat consolidate his image as a 'terrorists' instead of a political player and the perception appears to be true especially in the context of Indo-Pak equation.
