Rattled N Chandrababu Naidu claims data belongs to Telugu Desam

Vijayawada: TD president and AP Chief Minister N. Chandrababu Naidu was on Monday closeted with Advocate General Dammalapati Srinivas and DGP R.P. Thakur to reportedly discuss the implications of the case that was booked by Telangana police regarding the data of AP voters.

Later in the evening, Mr Naidu said on Twitter that the data was the property of the Telugu Desam and he would not spare anyone who had “stolen” it. He said the Telangana government would have to pay a heavy price for the crime being committed on the TD. “Their roots will be shaken,” he said.

Earlier, at a teleconference with party cadre, Mr Naidu said the TD had built the databank over the years since the 1990s. “The TD data includes the welfare details and insurance data of the cadres. This is party’s hard-earned data over last 24 years and a reflection of our hard work. By 1984 itself, we had computerised details of our 6 lakh cadres,” he explained to party workers.

“In 1995, we have started e-Seva and Mee Seva centres. Over last two-and-a-half decades, the state leadership and cadres worked hard and this data is the reflection of every bit of that effort. This data belongs to the Telugu Desam. It’s the sole property of our 70 lakh cadres. No government has the right to steal our data,” Mr Naidu said.

“You can copy our data. But this data theft by opponents will have serious consequences. We will take action against this heinous act. Data is property of an individual, property an organisation. We will file complaint with Central Election Commission against data theft,” he added.

“The removal of votes was KCR technology in the last election,” Mr Naidu said, referring to the deletion of about voters names in the Telangana state elections.

“The Bihari gang’s doing worse fearing defeat,” he said. “Bihari Prashant Kishor is giving wrong advice to YSRC, Modi and KCR support for Jagan’s cybercrimes. Jagan Mohan Reddy’s evil thoughts will never change and he has become an anarchist in the state. Everyone in the YSRC are frauds and loot ATM’s, exchange of currency and encourage cyber criminals,” he said.

He said wrong activities such as registering false votes and removal of genuine names should be condemned. A conspiracy was hatched in AP to remove 8 lakh votes, all thieves have to be identified and should face seven years imprisonment for forgery, Mr Naidu said, “74,000 false claims were made in Visakhapatnam district. All of them should be properly investigated and those who made false statements should be punished,” he said.

He said that Hyderabad had become and insecure place to live because of cybercriminals.

He alleged that YSRC leaders were masters in committing crimes, doing recce operations and creating suspicions. "This election is full of criminals in the opposition, TD should work with more alertness,” he told the cadre.

The Chief Minister said, “I assured the companies and brought them to Hyderabad, I have brought the companies with hard work and strength, but such companies and institutions are feeling insecure now. In future all companies may face this kind of raids in Hyderabad. Companies are being destroyed in the YSRC and TRS conspiracy. People should teach a lesson to YSRC for their sneaky activities.”

He condemned the raids by the Telangana police on the Telugu Desam app service provider in Hyderabad and alleged that efforts were being made to hand over the data to Opposition parties. The cases were registered in Hyderabad against those who are working for the TD in AP, asked whether that was the "return gift" of Telangana Chief Minister K. Chandrasekhar Rao. "When the property is in AP, cases were registered in Hyderabad," he alleged, adding he is ready to take such return gifts.

“For the last 25 years I have backed and encouraged technology. Basing on these technologies, I have built systems both for the government and the party. I have integrated technology to further the cause of welfare of the poor. I have used technology to bring transparency and accountability in administration,” he added.
