LS passes citizenship amendment Bill amid oppn protests

rchopra@tribunemail.com

Aditi Tandon

Tribune News Service

New Delhi, January 8

Lok Sabha passed the controversial citizenship amendment Bill amid protests and walkouts by opposition parties on the last day of its session on Tuesday.

Piloting the contentious Citizenship (Amendment) Bill 2019, Home Minister Rajnath Singh told the Opposition that the Bill was not against the provisions of the Constitution and would give succour to persecuted minorities in the three neighbouring countries.

"They have no place to go to, except India," he said, adding several leaders including first Prime Minister Jawaharlal Nehru were in favour of giving shelter to persecuted minorities in the neighouring countries.

The Bill seeks to amend the Citizenship Act, 1955, to provide Indian citizenship to people from listed categories of religious groups from Pakistan, Afghanistan and Bangladesh, and covers Hindus, Sikhs, Jains, Buddhists, Parsis and Christians. It does not cover Muslims.

After Singh called the Bill “urgent”, opposition Congress and TMC demanded reference of the same to a select committee saying the Bill was “weak and divisive”.

While Congress leader in Lok Sabha Mallikarjun Kharge led the walkout calling the Bill inadequate, TMC walked out after its MP Saugata Roy had spoken at length demanding the bill be made “secular”.

“Our demand is to include Muslims also. How can you leave out Muslims or, for that matter, any religious community suffering discrimination in the name of religion in other countries? This is against Article 14 of the Constitution. We also demand that immigrants from Nepal and Sri Lanka also be allowed Indian citizenship. Why limit the bill only to immigrants from Pakistan, Afghanistan and Bangladesh?”

The Bill says immigrants from the listed religious communities would be granted Indian citizenship after they have completed six years of residency in India as against the previous 12.

Singh allayed fears around the provisions saying the Bill was meant for the entire country and not just Assam.

The AGP on Monday quit the NDA alliance in Assam over the bill, saying it violated the Assam Accord which provided for deportation of all illegal immigrants who entered the state after 1971.

“The Assam border is a national border and we are committed to implementing the National Register of Citizens in Assam,” Singh said even as the TMC warned against the potential of the law to foment violence across India as is happening in Assam. With PTI
