Cong downplays differences in coalition govt with JDS

Cong downplays differences in coalition govt with JDS

A A A

Team Udayavani, Jan 8, 2019, 2:59 PM IST

Bengaluru: Downplaying the differences within the ruling alliance in Karnataka, Congress general secretary K C Venugopal Tuesday said there was no threat to his party’s coalition government with the JD(S), and the two parties would fight the Lok Sabha polls together.

He also said the Congres party and JD(S) would sort out all issues, including the seat sharing for parliament election “amicably.”

“From day one there are speculations about this government that it will fall in one or two days, there were claims that 17 people (MLAs) were taken to Mumbai and other places, there have been such reports constantly,” Venugopal said.

“Nothing has happened to the government so far and we have completed six months successfully,” he said.

“There may belittle bit issues, we will sort them out.

We are not much bothered about those things,” he said.

Venugopal’s comments have come at a time when JD(S) workers and leaders have been openly expressing their unhappiness against the Congress on a host of issues and have accused it of “big brother attitude.”

Congress leaders and legislators too are miffed with Chief Minister H D Kumaraswamy over his decision to put on hold some appointments despite recommendation from the party high command.

Leaders of both parties have publicly expressed their displeasure against each other.

Downplaying differences, the Congress general secretary questioned as to why the media was not highlighting coalition issues faced by the BJP nationally.

He said when there were differences within the BJP as a single party, “how can you expect everything to be smooth in a coalition like Congress and JD(S), who have fought against each other for many years.

There is no major issue at all; there is no threat at all (to the government).We are very confident, we will fight together and will take maximum number of seats in Karnataka.”

Asked about JD(S) demand for 12 out of 28 seats during the Lok Sabha polls, Venugopal said “Our seat sharing discussion hasn’t started so far. We will amicably settle everything.”

Meanwhile, supporters of Congress MLA Sudhakar staged a protest at the venue where the party meeting was organized, demanding “justice” for their leader.

Protesters alsothreatened to resign from gram panchayat posts, if Sudhakar wasnot appointed to the pollution control board at the earliest.

Kumaraswamy has put Sudhakar’s appointment as chairman of the State pollution control board on hold, saying Supreme Court guidelines had specified a certain qualification for the post.

The Congress Tuesday held meeting of pradesh congress committee office-bearers and district presidents, during which several organisational issues were discussed ahead of parliament elections, along with reviewing preparedness for the polls.

Pointing out that hardly two months are left for the announcement of polls, Venugopal said, at the meeting Tuesday it has been decided to strengthen the organisation at the grassroot level and interact with workers towards strengthening the party.

People contact programme will be held from January 26to February 15, under which each and every household will bereached, highlighting to them about failures of the presentBJP-led government and the need for bringing back Congress to power at the Centre, he said.

Orders have been issued to strengthen the booth level committees and DCC in two weeks, wherever they are weak, he said.

“We are hopeful that during parliamentaryelections, Karnataka will give maximum number of seats for our coalition. Our main motto is to target all the 28 seats in the state,” the congress leader added.
