Opposition must deny PM Modi space to politicise Balakot strike, says Omar Abdullah

National Conference vice-president Omar Abdullah on Tuesday said that opposition parties need to switch strategies in order to deny Prime Minister Narendra Modi the space to politicise the Pulwama terror attack and the Balakot air strike.

He took to Twitter to explain it by saying that the way to do it is to keep the messaging focused on the economy, rural distress, unemployment, agriculture.

Omar Abdullah tweeted, "The opposition parties need to switch tracks and deny the PM the space to politicise the recent terror attack/air strikes. The way to do it is to keep the messaging focused on the economy, rural distress, unemployment, agriculture and all the other things BJP doesn't want discussed."

The opposition parties need to switch tracks & deny the PM the space to politicise the recent terror attack/air strikes. The way to do it is to keep the messaging focused on the economy, rural distress, unemployment, agriculture & all the other things BJP doesn’t want discussed. Omar Abdullah (@OmarAbdullah) March 5, 2019

The former Jammu and Kashmir chief minister said that every time people talked about Pulwama or Balakot air strike, the door is left wide open for the PM Modi and the Bharatiya Janata Party to play to their strengths in front of their home audience.

"Every time we talk about Pulwama or Balakote we leave the door wide open for the PM and the BJP to play to their strengths in front of their home audience. Logic would dictate we switch strategies. Make them play to our strengths now," he said.

Every time we talk about Pulwama or Balakote we leave the door wide open for the PM & the BJP to play to their strengths in front of their home audience. Logic would dictate we switch strategies. Make them play to our strengths now. Omar Abdullah (@OmarAbdullah) March 5, 2019



On February 14, a suicide bombing in Pulwama killed 40 CRPF personnel that was claimed by the JeM. Following the incident, India conducted air strike at a Jaish-e-Mohammad (JeM) terror camp in Pakistan's Balakot on February 26.
