Social Media demand etiquettes: Satish Jacob

Hyderabad: Social Media tools are nothing short of a boon to the whole concept of news creation & dissemination but at the same time it demands a word of caution by the user. Experts of Mass Communication & Journalism expressed these views today during the inaugural of 3-day Workshop “Usages of Social Media Tools for Future Media” organized by the Department of Mass Communication & Journalism, Maulana Azad National Urdu University.

Eminent Broadcast Journalist, Mr. Satish Jacob, lamented the present state of affairs of Media, which according to him has nosedived in recent times, after setting high benchmarks in pre & post-independence era. He advised the users of Social Media to show “Adab” (Etiquette) while expressing their points of view.

Social media has gained so much prominence off late, should be a learning platform for budding journalists, he opined. He told the future journalists to uphold the truth and not to twist the facts.

Dr. Mohammad Aslam Parvaiz, Vice-Chancellor in his presidential address described social media as a combination of various dreams. It has provided from the camera and to all the related technologies at your fingertips, but its usage demands restrain & self-control, he advised.

This is an excellent opportunity to become a journalist. Dr. Aslam Parvaiz exhorted the students to abhor hate mongering comments. Bigotry can be conquered only by love & service, he remarked.

Mr. Pankaj Pachori, Senior Journalist & Editor GO News, asked the students to make proper use of this Workshop. He also expressed dismay over the state of present media but instead of mere crying foul, we need to rectify the fault, he suggested. If you are not satisfied with something, then don’t just sit, do something to improve the situation.

Senior Urdu journalist, Mr. Syed Vicaruddin, Editor-in-Chief, Urdu Daily Rehnuma-e-Deccan, Hyderabad was felicitated in absentia for his outstanding services towards Urdu Journalism. Dr. Mir Akber Ali Khan, Associate Editor, Rehnuma-e-Deccan, received the memento on his behalf and read out his message.

Audio Visual news stories by students of MCJ were also screened & appreciated.

Earlier, Prof. Ehtesham Ahmad Khan, Head of Department & Dean welcomed the guests and spoke about the aims & objectives of Workshop. Prof. Mohammad Fariyad conducted the proceedings. Mr. Mohd. Taher Qureshi, Assistant Professor proposed vote of thanks. Ms. Sadhika Tiwari, Social Media expert was also present. Later first ever Parent/Guardian meeting was organized at the Department.
