Ranbir Kapoor and Alia Bhatt’s film logo is out, we decode the SIGNIFICANCE of Brahmastra in Indian mythology

A few days back, on the auspicious occasion of Mahashivratri, the makers of Brahmastra released a logo of the three part series at the Kumbh Mela in Prayagraj wherein around 150 drones lit up the sky to form the logo. And today, the makers dropped the logo of the film online as Alia Bhatt took to her social media and shared the Brahmastra logo as she wrote, “Saare astro ka devta - #Brahmastra. The official movie logo is out now!! Releasing this #Christmas.” Now, according to legends, Brahmastra is Hindu God Brahma’s weapon that can destroy the universe. As described in the shastra, Brahmastra is considered to be one of the most deadliest weapons and when a Brahmastra is discharged, nobody can stop it.

In ancient Sanskrit writings, along with Brahmashirsha astra and Brahmanda astra, the Brahmastra was a weapon created by Brahma, and it is believed that Brahmastra and Brahmashirsha astra are mythical equivalent of modern day atomic weapons, nuclear and thermonuclear bombs respectively. Now, today, as the makers of Brahmastra shared the official logo of the movie, in the video, we can hear Amitabh Bachchan explaining the mystery behind the word Brahmastra to Ranbir Kapoor and Alia Bhatt. At the end, when Ranbir Kapoor aka Shiva asks Amitabh as to why is he able to see Brahmastra, Amitabh Bachchan says that ‘Kyunki tum Brahmastra ki aakhri ladai se jode hue ho’ and that means, he is connected to last fight to save the world. In the film, while Ranbir Kapoor will play Shiv, who can see the ancient astra because of a past connection to it, Alia Bhatt will be seen as Isha.

Shiva, as we all know, is known as the Destroyer within the Hindu Trinity that includes Brahma and Vishnu. And as per Indian Mythology, Shiva is the supreme being who protects and transforms the universe and can fight evils. And therefore, since Ranbir Kapoor is essaying the role of Shiva in the film and as per Hindi Mythology, Shiva is the destroyer who will sacrifice himself for peace; therefore, Amitabh Bachchan tells him that since he is the destroyer, he is related to the last fight.

Talking about the film, Brahmastra has been extensively shot in Bulgaria, New York, and Mumbai, and besides Amitabh Bachchan, Ranbir Kapoor and Alia Bhatt, the film also stars Mouni Roy and Tollywood actor Nagarjuna. Brahmastra is the first part of a sci-fi trilogy which has been created by Ayan Mukerji and the film is slated to release around Christmas this year.

ALSO READ: Brahmastra Logo: Amitabh Bachchan, Ranbir Kapoor & Alia Bhatt decode the mystery behind the ultimate weapon
