You Can Buy Fake Tweets, But You Need Real People To Vote: KTR To Chandrababu

The working president of the Telangana Rashtra Samithi, K Taraka Rama Rao (KTR), slammed Andhra Pradesh Chief Minister N Chandrababu Naidu for resorting to corrupt ways to gain power by hook or crook. In response to a newspaper article which stated that the TDP Supremo had paid hefty sums to engage Twitter Bots for its vindictive social media campaign against the TRS. The report also said that the AP government in a desperate bid to retain power had resorted to unlawful practices to propogate misinfiormation. Netizens have dubbed this TDP campiagn 'Cash for Tweet' scam. They feel that Chandrababu Naidu was using 'cash for tweet' to tarnish the image of the Telangana government with smear campaign to hide its own misdeeds. It may be recalled that T Lokeshwar Reddy, a resident of Kukatpally in Hyderabad filed a complaint with the Cyberabad police about a Madhapur based company IT Grids India Pvt Ltd stealing personal data of Andhra Pradesh citizens in the name of developing the Seva Mitra app for Telugu Desam Party. After the ruling TDP's act was exposed by the whistleblower, both Chief Minister Chandrababu Naidu and his son and AP IT Minister put the blame on Telangana government to escape any criticism from the people. The TDP roped in netizens for a price to carry out their agenda of a smear campaign against the TRS.

When the IT experts closely scrutinized the tweets, it emerged that these were posted by random people who had absolutely no connection to either Andhra Pradesh or its people. Besides, their geography was established as Rajasthan, Maharashtra and Uttar Pradesh. That's when KTR called Chandrababu's bluff and exposed the fake Twitter handles tweeting in favour of Andhra Pradesh with hashtag #TSGovtStealsData.

In a scathing attack on the TDP chief, KTR said that Chandrababu's sinister plan to defame Telangana government using paid handles was exposed and that after Cash for votes, Chandrababu had resorted to Cash for Tweet. The TRS working president also had a word of caution for the TDP chief. KTR said that even if Chandrababu could buy fake twitter handles, he needed real people to vote for him. Have a look at his tweet here...



TDP leadership's sinister plan to defame Telangana government by using paid twitter handles exposed. You could buy tweets from fake handles @ncbn Garu, but don't forget that you need real voters to vote for you!



Caught in #CashForVotes once and now again at it with #CashForTweet pic.twitter.com/OlMOeJLUhV — KTR (@KTRTRS) March 5, 2019

Also Read: Personal Data Exposed To Hackers In Guise Of TDP App Seva Mitra
