Opposition uniting to remove me, but Modi is working hard to remove terrorism: PM Modi

Kalaburagi (Karnataka) [India], Mar 6 (ANI): Bubbling with confidence, Prime Minister Narendra Modi on Wednesday said that he was not afraid of Pakistan, thieves or the corrupt thanks to the blessings of 1.25 crore people of the country.

Launching a blitzkrieg on his political opponents, Prime Minister Modi said that they were uniting to remove him, but he was working hard to remove terrorism.

“They are uniting to remove Modi, and Modi is working hard to remove terror. Terrorism, poverty, corruption must be removed from the country and I am working with this target only,” he said while addressing a public rally here.

“After 30 years, a complete majority government has been formed at the Centre in Delhi. Modi is a reason of trouble for many others. Hence, day and night they are working to remove Modi,” he said.

Attacking Chief Minister HD Deve Gowda led Congress-JDS government in the state for not implementing the Pradhan Mantri Kisan Samman Nidhi Scheme (PM-KSNS), he said: “Some governments think that in their state if farmers get Rs 2,000 in their account, they will start chanting Modi’s name.”

“That is why Karnataka government and remotely controlled Chief Minister (HD Kumaraswamy) had not sent us the list of the state’s farmers. We gave financial help to farmers across the country but couldn’t to the farmers in Karnataka. No farmer of the state will forgive the state government,” he said.

“They are perturbed because Modi is directly depositing money directly in the bank accounts and no one would be able to take anything from it. This is the truth of the ‘Mahamilawat’ (adulteration) of corrupt and dynastic people,” he said.

“I want to tell them if they will become a wall between farmers and the Central assistance, the farmers will destroy this wall. For the vote, they take names of farmers and poor but forget them after getting votes. They don’t fulfill their own promise and are creating hurdles in the public welfare work of others,” he said.

Talking about sugarcane farmers, Prime Minister Modi said: “The fair and remunerative price (FRP) has been increased for sugarcane. Additional financial assistance of Rs 14 per quintal will be credited directly in their accounts. It is their problem that till Modi is in the government, the thieves won't be able to run their shops.”

He also spoke about a large number of unaccounted names in the list of beneficiaries during past governments and emphasised that the transparent system under his dispensation has now ensured that the leakage stops and the financial assistance reaches directly the rightful beneficiaries.

“Previous governments had nurtured such a system that there were approximately 8 crore people, who were only on papers. They were not born and were taking school scholarship; would get married, and become Divyang. There would be some such person even now but my digging is going on,” he said.

Prime Minister Modi said: “In name of these fake persons, the middlemen were taking one lakh 10 crore people for a ride every year. It is obvious that these middlemen whose income has stopped will abuse me but I have the blessings of 1.25 crore Indians and I am not afraid of anyone.”

Taking a dig at Karnataka government, he said: “The state has a ‘mazboor’ (helpless) government but I hope you don’t want such a government at the Centre. Sometimes we have to pay a heavy price for a small mistake. The people of Karnataka must be experiencing it.”

Prime Minister Modi also laid the foundation stone for a BPCL depot here. “Raichur depot was small and unable to cater to the needs. It was spread over 2.5 acres of land. It is now being built over 56-acre land. The Congress people lose their sleep listening to this 56,” he said, in an apparent reference to their ’56-inch chest’ jibe.

He also a few other development projects at Kalaburagi including ESIC Hospital and Medical College, Bengaluru, as well as the Super Specialty Block of KIMS, Hubballi, both of which were dedicated to the nation.

A women’s hostel for students from the northeast at Bangalore University was also dedicated to the nation by Prime Minister Modi. He also had an interaction with the Ayushman Bharat beneficiaries from the region. (ANI)
