Kolkata: Beware! Hackers cracking banking app

KOLKATA: Your cellphone now risks being hacked for fraudulent bank transactions. The city police are investigating three complaints in which victims have downloaded a mobile app for easier banking transactions only to see their accounts being cleaned out with hackers taking control of their cellphone.The app, AnyDesk, is an unified payments interface (UPI) platform, which integrates multiple bank accounts into a single mobile application promising to make transactions faster and simpler.In February, RBI had warned banks against this emerging digital banking fraud that can wipe out a customer’s bank balance.Girish Park resident Kishan Kumar Bisht and Deshapriya Park resident Ananda Roy fell prey to this fraud when they ordered items online and wanted to exchange the products, they had ordered. They were taken aback when they were told to share their bank account details for a full refund. Wary of online frauds, they refused. Then they were asked to download the mobile app AnyDesk to receive the amount paid. They did as told, and in the next 24 hours they lost between Rs 12,000 and Rs 20,000.“Being from software background, I know one can use software that can help one to get access to a computer hundreds of kilometres away. That mobile phones too can be hacked the same way was possible only in theory. I learnt this the hard way,” said Roy.Jorabagan resident Kusum Bajaj had a somewhat different experience. A regular online shopper, she was offered attractive cashbacks if she was willing to download the AnyDesk app. By the time Bajaj realized the implications of her download she was poorer by Rs 2.8 lakh.According to the police, complaints regarding AnyDesk and mobile phone hacking to commit bank fraud is a new import to Kolkata. “This is a completely different modus operandi. We will also seek feedback from all stakeholders, including the payment banks,” an officer said.According to RBI after fraudsters get victims to download the AnyDesk app, hackers get remote access to the mobile through a nine-digit code generated on the victim’s cell-phone. If the fraudster manages to insert this app code in their device they can gain access to the victim’s device and carry out transaction fraudulently. Banking experts claim that the app can acquire all the details from a smartphone user while it asks for regular privacy permissions during download.Investigators said that they have some leads on the fraudsters.“A few fake BPOs across the southern fringes of the city had tried to make a fortune by cheating customers and taking control of their laptops. It seems that some old elements from those gangs are part of this new fraud circle,” said a senior police officer. Police said they hoped to track down the fraudsters soon.
