Citizenship Amendment Bill: Northeast erupts over citizenship bill, 6 hurt in Agartala firing

Northeast India erupts in protests over Citizenship Bill, several injured

The north-east erupted in protest on Tuesday against the Citizenship (Amendment) Bill, 2016 with Assam being the worst affected as several parts of the state were in the grip of violence. BJP offices in Assam were target of attacks by agitators during the 11-hour bandh called by organisations of indigenous people protesting against the Bill which was passed in the Lok Sabha.The states of Tripura, Mizoram, Arunachal Pradesh, Manipur and Meghalaya were also hit by the bandh which was marred by violence in some parts. Six persons were injured, three of them critically, when police opened fire on the Assam-Agartala national highway in the eastern part of Agartala. In a setback to BJP, the governments of Meghalaya, Nagaland and Mizoram, which are ruled by the saffron party’s allies, expressed reservations against the bill.Led by the North East Students’ Organisation (NESO) and the All-Assam Students’ Union (AASU), agitators blocked streets in multiple places of Guwahati and damaged vehicles. Motorbike-borne men in masks travelled across the city and pelted stones at passing vehicles and even manhandled drivers. A video of these men attacking vehicles, which was shot on a mobile phone, later went viral on the internet. At least 44 people were arrested.In Dibrugarh, a mob of 200 people ransacked the BJP district office, pulled down the signboard and set it ablaze. Police lobbed teargas shells and fired in the air to disperse protesters, who refused to budge and threw stones at the cops. Dibrugarh additional SP Surjeet Singh Panesar was among those injured in the violence.“We have so far detained 12 persons for vandalism and stone-pelting. We have identified the others too. All of them belong to a particular political party,” said Panesar. The bandh supporters also staged a demonstration near chief minister Sarbananda Sonowal’s Dibrugarh residence.BJP offices were also vandalised in Golaghat town and Teok in Jorhat district. Ferry services to and from Majuli Island were stopped and train tracks in Dhemaji, Lakhimpur and Nagaon district blocked.Minutes after the Lok Sabha passed the Bill, BJP spokesman Mehdi Alam Bora resigned from the party in protest. “I truly feel that the bill will harm the Assamese society,” Bora, a former Congressman who had joined BJP in 2016, told TOI.In Cachar and Karimganj districts of Bengali-dominated Barak Valley, the strike failed to elicit a response. However, life was affected in certain parts of Hailakandi district, where MLAs Anwar Hussain Laskar and Sujam Uddin Laskar were held for obstructing officials from attending offices.Indigenous People’s Front of Tripura assistant general secretary Mangal Debbarma said they had extended moral support to NESO’s shutdown. IPFT is a member of the BJP-led North East Democratic Alliance.In Mizoram, Aizawl wore a deserted look with government offices, banks, financial institutions, and educational institutions remaining closed.In Meghalaya, sporadic incidents of stone-pelting were reported and several roads were blocked by protesters.
