Indian Army warns Pak of 'dire consequences' over 'further provocation or misadventure'

New Delhi [India], Mar 6 (ANI): With Pakistani troops continuing to indulge in unprovoked firing in civilian areas, the Indian Army has warned that "any further provocation or misadventure” from the Pakistani side will be responded in a “befitting manner with dire consequences.”

“All actions taken by our defence forces are targeted towards counter-terrorism and terrorist infrastructure, away from civilian areas, to avoid civilian casualties. We are maintaining strict vigil along the Line of Control and IB. Any further provocation or misadventure by Pakistan will be responded in a befitting manner with dire consequences,” read a statement issued by the Army.

In its statement, the Army said a warning was issued to Pakistan to not target civilian areas.

“In the last 24 hours, the Pakistan Army resorted to intense and unprovoked firing with heavy caliber weapons in selected areas of Krishna Ghati and Sunderbani, targeting Indian posts and civilian areas with Mortar bombs and heavy Arty Guns. The same was effectively retaliated by the Indian Army. There have been no casualties on the Indian side,” the statement added.



The Indian Army is “committed to avoid civil casualties, especially along the Line of Control,” the statement said.

Cross-border firing intensified after India, less than two weeks after the Pulwama terror attack, carried out air strikes in Pakistan targetting terror launch pads in Balakot. A day after the aerial strikes, Pakistani jets violated Indian airspace in Rajouri sector of Jammu and Kashmir on February 27 and dropped bombs on their way out.

The February 27 dog fight between Indian Air Force pilots and Pakistanis resulted in the shooting down of an F-16 by Indian MiG-21 pilot Wing Commander Abhinandan Varthaman, who was the only pilot who fired at Pakistani aircraft from the Indian side in the engagement, sources said.

The entire operation took place over the skies of Rajouri district of Jammu and Kashmir after the Pakistanis made a failed attempt to target Indian military targets in Nowshera sector. (ANI)
