VK Singh wants surgical strike within the country

Invokes Israel’s Operation Munich to demand unquestionable obedience of the Army and likens student leaders with leeches



NEW DELHI Union minister VK Singh said people want India to emulate Israel in targeting terrorists but it cannot happen because the Opposition in that country, unlike India, does not question and “insult” its army when it carries out tasks like ‘Operation Munich’.



It was a reference to the covert operation of Israeli spy agency Mossad to kill those involved in the terror attack on the country’s 1972 Munich Olympics contingent.



In a Facebook post—titled ‘Why India does not become Isreal?’—Singh attacked government critics, including Opposition members, student leaders, activists and media, and called for a “surgical strike” within India. The former Army chief called student leaders accused of involvement in “anti-India” protests as “jonk” (leeches) and took aim at the media for referring to terrorists as “militants”.



‘Jaish doesn’t exist in Pak’



Meanwhile, Pakistan’s military spokesperson, Major General Asif Ghafoor, said Jaish-e-Mohammad (JeM) which claimed responsibility for the Pulwama attack does not exist in that country, days after Foreign Minister Shah Mahmood Qureshi admitted that the terror outfit’s chief is present in Pakistan. He said the JeM claiming responsibility for the Pulwama attack was not made from inside Pakistan.



Police station attack: Musa’s key man held



The National Investigation Agency arrested a man, Amir Nazir Mir, in J&K’s Awantipora in connection with the 2018 grenade attack on a police station in Punjab, in which one personnel was injured. The NIA has alleged that Kashmir-based terror outfit Ansar Ghazawat-ul-Hind, headed by Zakir Musa, was behind the attack. Mir is suspected to have facilitated the delivery of four grenades used in the attack, and allegedly took orders directly from Musa. Two other suspects were arrested earlier, while two more died in an encounter in south Kashmir.



—ANIL RAINA


