Law-and-order in MP is ‘lo aur order do’: Amit Shah slams Kamal Nath govt

Sagar (Madhya Pradesh), [India], Mar 7 (ANI): BJP president Amit Shah came all guns blazing on Madhya Pradesh government on Thursday for allegedly stalling the plans of central government and turning a blind eye to the law-and-order situation in the state.

“During Shivraj Singh government, law-and-order meant ‘kanoon aur vyavastha’, now it means ‘take and order’, bribe and order,” he said addressing a gathering of party workers in Sagar, Madhya Pradesh.

“Recently, two children were abducted and murdered. No one (from the government) went to wipe off the tears of their parents. Earlier, if something like this happened, Mama (Shivraj Singh Chuahan) used to reach even before their parents did,” he added.

Mocking at Kamal Nath led Madhya Pradesh government, Shah alleged that this was the ‘change’ this government has brought in the state.

“Earlier, the government was for poor people, farmers. Now, the government is for middlemen,” he said praising the erstwhile Shivraj Singh Chauhan government.

He further alleged that incumbent Kamal Nath government was hesitating to put into action, the plans and schemes of the Modi government.

“Earlier, Madhya Pradesh was always no. 1 in implementing central government schemes. Kamal Nath government has stopped these schemes because it fears that Prime Minister Narendra Modi will become popular,” Shah said.

BJP president accused the state government of tricking the farmers. “Your Shehzada (prince) came from Delhi. You clicked pictures with him. The loan of around Rs. 50,000 crore was to be waived but till now, the debt of only Rs. 5,000 crore has been waived. You have tricked the farmers of Madhya Pradesh,” he added.

The BJP president warned Kamal Nath government for allegedly creating hurdles in the implementation of Ayushman Bharat Yojna. “I am warning the Kamal Nath government for creating hurdles in the implementation of Ayushman Bharat Yojna. Playing with the interests of poor will not be good,” Shah said warning the Kamal Nath government.

Shah talked of the various schemes of Modi government and their benefits to the common man. He said the 2109 elections were important not just for the BJP but for India as well. He exhorted party workers to make Madhya Pradesh a BJP bastion once again.

Shah had kept a fair share of ammunition to attack ‘shehzade’ Rahul Gandhi as well.

“He (Rahul) is touring the country. Let me tell him, BJP is like a Phoenix bird. It has the capability to rise from the ashes. We haven’t lost (Madhya Pradesh elections). We got more votes. Yes, you (Congress) won,” he said at the rally.

“Rahul baba talks of taking the nation forward. For 55 years, your family ruled. What did you do in those 55 years? You couldn’t do anything in 55 years while Modi government brought a change in just 55 months,” Shah said taking a dig at the Gandhi family.

Shah questioned the Congress president’s general knowledge on agriculture. “Rahul baba is suggesting that loans should be waived. Please tell us what are Rabi crops without reading it from a piece of paper,” he said.

“He (Rahul) is not aware if the potatoes grow above the soil or below the soil or if they are grown in a factory,” he added.

Comparing the performance of the Modi government with the erstwhile UPA government, he said, ”You(UPA) waived the loan of 3 crore farmers in 10 years amounting to a sum of 53,000 crores. Modi government has brought a plan which will benefit 12 crore farmers amounting to 75,000 crores in just one year,” BJP president said.

Praising the Modi government for its handling of national security issues, he said, ”Security is not just a slogan for us. We have told the world what would be the consequence of playing with it,” he said.

He further claimed that soldiers today feel proud that they don’t have to look for orders from Delhi in case someone fires at them.

He also criticised Rahul for allegedly asking evidence of air strikes.

“Rahul baba says that we need evidence. Let me tell him it is the Congress party which indulges in fraud acts, not the BJP. When Air Force officers are saying that they have conducted the strikes, then, should someone doubt it,” Shah questioned.

“Only two countries were known for avenging the martyrdom of their soldiers, USA and Israel. Modi ji has added India’s name to that list.

“Prime Minister Narendra Modi has not taken a day off in the last 25 years. Rahul takes a vacation of three months and even his mother doesn’t get to know about it,” Shah. (ANI)
