‘Secret papers’

I am flabbergasted by the Attorney General’s statement in the Supreme Court that the “secret documents” published by The Hindu on the purchase of 36 Rafale fighter aircraft for the Indian Air Force were “stolen” from the Ministry of Defence and that the government was thinking of initiating “criminal action” against the daily as persons publishing them were guilty under the Official Secrets Act (“Secret papers on Rafale deal stolen: govt.”, March 7). The government has now proved right those who have voiced their concerns about governmental actions undermining constitutional norms. As a corollary, the government has also proved the veracity of the documents published by The Hindu. The government has only portrayed its weakness by attacking the messenger and ignoring the message. The government must now stop hiding behind a wall of obfuscation.

Mankiran N.,

Ludhiana, Punjab

With the AG’s admission, the issue gets murkier. It is simply incomprehensible how such important documents are unsecured in the Defence Ministry. The daily’s revelations and the AG’s stance have given many the ammunition to question the government. Rather than contemplating criminal action, the government must clear the air and the issues.

G.B. Sivanandam,

Coimbatore

It was the BJP that made merry over leaks about the AgustaWestland deal to pin down the Congress. But now desperate to dodge the missiles from the Rafale deal, it declares the coin itself to be stolen. Little does it realise that masterpieces of art acquire unprecedented value when stolen. The Supreme Court, as the curator, would be interested more in the safety of the piece of art than any other aspect. So would be the citizen as the insurer. After all, he is the one who pays for the loss of truth.

R. Narayanan,

Navi Mumbai

The AG’s threat makes the government no different from a fascist regime. It is a fact that The Hindu has had a spirit of ethical journalism since time immemorial. The government’s demand to reveal the whistleblower is not a threat to The Hindu alone, but a threat to democracy itself.

Adrian David,

Chennai

Being labelled a document thief is a small price to pay for a newspaper of The Hindu’s standing in the discharge of its obligations. The charge of theft must be worn as a badge of honour as it was made in response to placing information in the public domain which the government wanted to suppress in order to hide the truth about the deal. Not naming one’s source is a universally accepted journalistic privilege, which is not for any government to deny. The court’s observation that the ‘stolen’ documents are not ‘untouchable’ and can be looked at as supplementary to the review petitions puts the government on the defensive.

G. David Milton,

Maruthancode, Tamil Nadu

It is evident the government changed the nitty-gritty of certain procedures to favour a private corporate entity. The government can no longer hide its wrongdoings under the pretext of national security. By denying us the information sought, the government is giving room for suspicion that there was a definite move to bypass the rules.

D. Manohara Rao

Visakhapatnam

It is indeed shocking and unbelievable for the government to say that these are “stolen documents”. Such a statement lowers the image of the country in the eyes of the world. It also shows that there are moles in various governments willing to share such documents. How far such a practice is in terms of ethics and in the name of public interest is a debatable point.

M.S. Vaidyanathan,

Chennai

When a book, Keralathile Africa (The Africa in Kerala) was published in 1963, highlighting the plight of the disinherited, displaced and alienated Adivasis of Kerala, the then Kerala government tried to initiate disciplinary action against the author, K. Panoor, a government employee, by invoking the Defence of India Rules. The devastating irony was that it was an LDF government.

Sukumaran C.V.,

Palakkad, Kerala
