Britain offers India help in intelligence sharing

Doval has been in constant touch with his counterparts from a number of countries all of whom have extended their support to India.

New Delhi: Following the Pulwama terror attack and the subsequent aerial strikes carried out by the Air Force at the Balakot terror camp inside Pakistan, support continues to pour in for India from the international community with the national security adviser of the United Kingdom Mark Sedwill having a detailed discussion with his Indian counterpart Ajit Doval on Thursday.

Government sources said UK has offered India all possible assistance in its fight against terror, particularly on the issue of intelligence sharing and other relevant information that may help Indian security agencies in targeting terror outfits operating out of Pakistan.

Afeter Pulwama, India has adopted an aggressive strategy in dealing with the international community to help isolate Pakistan on the issue of terrorism. Mr Doval has been in constant touch with his counterparts from a number of countries all of whom have extended their support to India. Sources said Mr Sedwill during his conversation with Mr Doval expressed solidarity with India in the aftermath of the Pulwama terrorist attack. Interestingly, Thursday’s call was initiated by the British NSA.

Mr Sedwill reiterated that Britain was willing to provide all assistance to Indian in dealing with any form of terrorism through counter-terrorism co-operation, intelligence-sharing and by bringing the perpetrators of terrorist attacks to justice, the sources added.

The telephonic conversation between the two NSAs assumes significance amid increased tension between India and Pakistan following the Pulwama attack. The Pakistan-based terror group Jaish-e-Mohammed claimed responsibility of the strike in which 40 CRPF personnel were killed.

Indian Air Force had on February 26, Indian Air Force struck JeM’s biggest terrorist training camp in Balakot deep inside Pakistan. A day later, Pakistan retaliated by attempting to target Indian military installations though the move was successfully thwarted by the Indian Air Force.
