Indian Army: Army decides to send more youths to the frontline

NEW DELHI: The Indian Army will send nearly 230 young officers from the headquarters in Delhi to units and field formations deployed at the frontline, as part of a move to improve its fighting capabilities and address a shortage of officers on the ground, government officials said.These officers, who are largely of the rank of colonel and below, will add to the leadership needed in commanding troops during operations. The units are currently operating at half their authorised officer strength — with just 10-12 officers against the authorised strength of 20-25, which is adding to the strain on them.These officers would be ‘relocated’ to units and formations on India’s western front with Pakistan and the eastern front with China . The Army is currently working on the details, the officials said.The move is the outcome of one of the four studies ordered by Army chief General Bipin Rawat in June last year, to transform the Army into an agile, lethal and networked force capable of meeting challenges.Officials said the defence ministry has accepted all the recommendations made in the study titled ‘Reorganisation of the Army Headquarters ’. The study was submitted to the ministry on February 7.“The study has aligned old legacy branches of the Army Headquarters under functional requirements of the future battlefield. This has resulted in 229 officers being optimised from the headquarters at Delhi and being relocated to units and formations of the field armies. This is nearly 20% of the number of officers currently posted at the headquarters,” said a government official.The total officer strength at the headquarters is around 1,100, he said. ET had reported that the Army was considering this move. As much as 90% of the 229 officers are of the rank of colonel and below. This means that they would at most be in their mid-30s, making them an important fighting element.“For a long time, it was felt that a large number of officers who are young and combat worthy are away from units. While it caused a strain on the infrastructure of the Army Headquarters, there were lesser number of fighting officers at the front,” said an official.Officials said the move does not entail any new posts and related financial implications. A part of the vacancies created at the headquarters by the moving out of these officers would be met by re-employed officers.The army will also have two new branches for vigilance and human rights issues. They will be headed by Major General rank officers. The new Additional Director General Vigilance will function directly under the Army Chief, while the new ADG Human Rights (ADG HR) will be under the Vice Chief. Importantly, the HR branch will have a police officer. This will be the first time that a police officer will be part of an army directorate. “The Vigilance and HR branches will also have officers from the navy and air force and a police officer. Other than the two officers from the navy and air force, the ADG Vigilance will also have a new ‘vigilance investigation unit’ under him. Similarly, the ADG HR will have a police officer with him to facilitate necessary coordination with other organisations and MHA,” said an official.The move is aimed for further integration with not only among the three defence services, but also the paramilitary forces, where several IPS officers are on deputation.The ministry has also accepted another recommendation of the study to have a third Deputy Chief in the army. He will be designated as Deputy Chief of the Army Staff Strategy. “He will deal with all operational and force planning matters. He will have the military operations, military intelligence, strategic planning and operational logistics branches as well as the newly created Information Warfare branch under him,” explained an official.This means that the Director General of Military Operations (DGMO) and Director General of Military Intelligence (DGMI) will come under him.Another major reform accepted by the ministry is merging the verticals of the Deputy Chief (Planning & Systems)- looks at capital procurements- and the Master General of Ordnance (MGO), who is tasked with revenue procurements. They will be merged into one office of Deputy Chief of Army Staff (Capability Development and Sustenance). Under this office, ‘better synergies’ have been provided for capital and revenue expenditures. The Deputy Chief (P&S) and the DG Weapons & Equipment (DGWE) have been merged into the new ‘DG Capability Development’ (DGCD), who will be dealing with all capital procurements. Similarly, all revenue procurements have been centralised under the new ‘DG Sustenance’, who is the successor of the erstwhile MGO.The other three studies are on ‘Reorganisation and rightsizing of the Army’, ‘Cadre review of officers’ and ‘Review of terms of engagement of rank and file’
