Day after firing plaint, man shoots neighbour

Ludhiana: Police’s alleged callousness cost an elderly man’s life on Thursday as a fellow villager went on a firing spree, fuming over a police “complaint” filed against him for firing in the air in an inebriated condition a day back.

The incident happened at Noorwala village on Thursday morning.

The victim, identified as Balbir Singh, 67, was a farmer, while the accused — Jagdev Singh, 33 — also a farmer, was his neighbour.

Village sarpanch Rupinder Singh, who is a nephew of Balbir, had complained against Jagdev for firing in the air in an inebriated condition on Wednesday. Importantly, a cop from Meharban police station visited Jagdev’s house on Thursday, but he returned without seizing the weapon. After the cop had left, angry Jagdev came out of his house and started firing in the air. When the sarpanch and his uncle came out of their house, Jagdev allegedly fired at them, leaving Balbir injured.

While Jagdev escaped from the spot on a scooter, Balbir was taken to Dayanand Medical College and Hospital (DMCH) where he succumbed to his injury.

Villagers claimed that earlier too they have complained against Jagdev Singh for firing in the air, but the police had not taken any action. On Thursday, a head constable who went to Jagdev’s house returned without seizing his weapon on the assurance that that he would submit his weapon to the police by the evening.

Sarpanch Rupinder Singh said, “Jagdev would often fire in the air after drinking. I have complained to police against him several times, but to no avail. During panchayat elections in December, everyone’s weapon was submitted. Jagdev has got his weapon back even as we are still waiting for the same.”

“When Jagdev fired in the air on Wednesday evening, I called the Meharban police and complained against him. Today, a cop came to Jagdev’s house but he did not seize his weapon. When I questioned him, he told that Jagdev has been given time till 4pm to submit the weapon. As soon as the cop left, Jagdev brought out his weapon and started firing. On hearing the gunshots, me, my father and uncle Balbir Singh rushed out of the house. On seeing us, Jagdev fired at us and the bullet hit my uncle.”

“It is a negligence on the part of the police. The cop should have seized the weapons of Jagdev rather than giving him time to submit the same. Their laxity has cost the life of my uncle. Earlier too, I have complained several times to police, but they did not take any action. I demand action against cops and arrest of accused,” he added.

Assistant commissioner of police (east) Devinder Chaudhary said Jagdev has two licensed weapons — .315 bore rifle and .32 bore revolver. The police have found three bullet shells of .32 revolver from the crime spot. An FIR has been registered in this case. The accused is on run, he added.

On asking about the negligence of cops, ACP Chaudhary said, “Head constable Harjeet Singh had gone to Jagdev’s house. I agree that he should have seized his weapon. I will report to the senior officials about it and they would be able to take further action.”

Rivalry

During panchayat elections, accused Jagdev Singh expressed his wish to become the sarpanch. However, villagers unanimously elected Rupinder Singh as sarpanch. Rupinder said that time too, Jagdev had threatened to kill him. However, after elections were over, everybody had forgotten about it.



Facebook Twitter Linkedin EMail
