Bharat Bandh LIVE Updates: Protesters vandalise government bus in Dinhata, driver injured

New Delhi:

Trade unions will continue their 48-hour long strike across the country on Wednesday. The nationwide shutdown was called by 10 trade unions in protest against alleged anti-people policies of the central government. Stray incidences of violence were reported from West Bengal on Tuesday. Strike supporters burnt effigies of Prime Minister Narendra Modi and burnt tyres on streets in some parts of the state. In Howrah, Siliguri, Bardhaman, Birbhum, North and South 24 Paraganas, clashes were reported between Trinamool Congress workers and strike supporters as TMC activists tried to stop them from forcibly imposing the strike. There was a partial impact on banking operations as well. Centre of Indian Trade Union (CITU) claimed around 20 crore workers from all sectors of the economy participated in the strike across the country.



Bharat Bandh Day 2: Here are the live updates

11:50 (IST) Facebook Twitter Whats app Linked In Banking services partially affected as a section of PSU bank employees came in support of the nation-wide strike call. All India Bank Employees' Association (AIBEA) and Bank Employees' Federation of India (BEFI) have supported the strike, which has impacted banking operation where these two unions are strong. However, the operation in SBI and private sector banks remained unaffected as other seven unions in the banking sector are not part of the strike.

11:45 (IST) Facebook Twitter Whats app Linked In Protestors vandalise government bus in Dinhata, driver injured.



#WestBengal: Protesters during 48-hour Central Trade Unions strike vandalised a government bus in Dinhata, Cooch Behar; 2 people including bus driver injured, police present at the spot pic.twitter.com/1lmOpwgQGO

— ANI (@ANI) January 9, 2019



10:10 (IST) Facebook Twitter Whats app Linked In Two students injured after protestors pelted stones at a bus at Shanpur Mor on Jhikira-Howrah route.





Howrah: Two students injured after protestors participating in the two-day nationwide strike called by Central Trade Unions demanding minimum wages and social security schemes among others, pelt stones at a bus at Shanpur Mor on Jhikira-Howrah route. #WestBengal pic.twitter.com/R3YpOEmUFs

— ANI (@ANI) January 9, 2019



10:08 (IST) Facebook Twitter Whats app Linked In CPM leader Sujan Chakraborty along with other protestors detained by police.





Kolkata: CPM leader Sujan Chakraborty along with other protestors detained by police while they were participating in the two-day nationwide strike called by Central Trade Unions demanding minimum wages and social security schemes among others. #WestBengal pic.twitter.com/umdCeJitKc

— ANI (@ANI) January 9, 2019



09:59 (IST) Facebook Twitter Whats app Linked In State govt directs bus drivers to wear a helmet while driving, in view of the nationwide strike.



Visuals from Kolkata-Jadavpur bus stand in Kolkata: State govt directs bus drivers to wear helmet while driving, in view of nationwide strike called by Central Trade Unions demanding minimum wages, social security schemes & against privatisation of public&govt sector. #WestBengal pic.twitter.com/Hsw0tCxhtp

— ANI (@ANI) January 9, 2019



For all the Latest India News, Download News Nation Android and iOS Mobile Apps.
