‘Gayab ho gaya’ is new tag line for government on Rafale deal: Rahul

New Delhi: Congress president Rahul Gandhi addressed the media on Thursday on the Rafale controversy.

ADVERTISEMENT

Taking a dig at Modi government, Gandhi said, ‘Gayab ho gaya’ is the new tag line for the government on Rafale deal.

“On one hand you are saying the documents are missing, so this means the documents are genuine and it is clearly written in them that PMO was carrying out parallel negotiations,” he added.

“Yes of course take action on those involved in this missing documents case but also initiate an inquiry on PMO making parallel negotiations,” Gandhi said.

Sharpening his attack moments later, he asked: “Why doesn’t the PM get a probe ordered if he isn’t guilty”.

ADVERTISEMENT

He said investigate everyone but probe Modi as well.

Targeting PM Modi, Gandhi said, “These days everything seems to be disappearing. Jobs for two crore youth – disappeared, promise of Rs. 15 lakh for all citizens – disappeared, promises of right price for farm produce – disappeared, economic growth – disappeared. And now, even the Rafale files – disappeared.”

“PM Modi performed bypass surgery in Rafale deal. The purchase was delayed to benefit Anil Ambani,” Gandhi said, addressing a press conference in Delhi.

Talking about the alliance in Delhi for the upcoming elections, Gandhi said that overall our alliances are on track, in Delhi the party unit unanimously said no to a tie-up.

Speaking on Indo-Pak relations, Rahul Gandhi said, “PM got ISI to Pathankot, went to meet Nawaz Sharif, he is the poster boy of Pakistan”.

Speaking about the IAF strikes on terror camp in Pakistan, Rahul said, “I won’t talk much about it (evidence of IAF strikes), but yes I read that families of some of the CRPF personnel who were martyred have raised this issue, they are saying we were hurt so please show us what happened.”

The Congress president’s fresh attack comes a day after the government’s top law officer told the Supreme Court that the documents cited by lawyer Prashant Bhushan were ‘stolen’.
