Scindia rules out alliance with SP-BSP, takes jibe at Akhilesh Yadav

New Delhi [India], Mar 9 (ANI): Congress general secretary in-charge of western Uttar Pradesh Jyotiraditya Scindia on Saturday ruled out any alliance with the SP-BSP combine in the state and took a jibe at Akhilesh Yadav for the SP chief's two Lok Sabha seats for Congress remark.

His statement came in the wake of Wednesday's comments of Yadav who said, "Congress is a part of the (SP-BSP) alliance. It has two seats in UP and they (Congress) will fight on those two seats.”

Attacking Yadav, Scindia said, "Congress is even ready to leave 2-3 Lok Sabha seats in the state for them."

To a specific question if he was completely ruling out any alliance with the SP-BSP combine, Scindia told reporters in New Delhi, ”We have always said that dialogue and discussion are very necessary. These must happen from both the sides. They should think about it too.”

The Congress leader said, "We have stated it time and again that our primary aim is to establish a UPA government at the Centre. We are going to fight the elections on our own in Uttar Pradesh."

”If he (Yadav) thinks like that, we too will leave two-three seats for them,” he said.

“We respect the decision that SP and Bahujan Samajwadi Party have taken, but we will fight elections on our own in UP,” he added.

Scindia said, “As of now, they (SP-BSP) are trying to traverse a different path although for the same goal."

He said, “We are going to establish Congress on the grass-root level in UP and we are committed to go ahead on that path.”

Scindia urged ‘like-minded' parties to think alike. “Like-minded parties should think alike. We respect all political parties. Our paths may be different but our goal is the same,” he said.

Asked about Congress accepting defectors from the other parties, he said, “Our doors are open for all those who want to make a new Uttar Pradesh. It is a matter of pride for us as well that they are joining us. This is a partnership based on principles and this will last long.”

“The Congress party under Rahul Gandhi doesn’t believe in give and take. This is my message to the people of UP as well that Congress was, is and will be standing with you under all circumstances. We want a UP free of corruption and unemployment,” Scindia sai

Asked if BJP or SP-BSP combine is a bigger challenge for Congress, he said, ”There are opportunities where you see challenges. It requires hard work to convert that challenge into an opportunity."

Soon after the statement of Akhilesh Yadav, Congress released its first list of candidates from Uttar Pradesh followed by Samajwadi Party. (ANI)
