'You'll Be In Trouble If Aravali Is Harmed,' We Must Thank SC For Sending This Message To Haryana Govt

Sending out a strongly worded warning, the Supreme Court has reminded the Haryana Government not to take any action that will affect the ecological balance of the Aravalli hills and forest.

"We are concerned with Aravalli. If you are doing anything with Aravalli or Kant Enclave you will be in trouble. If you are doing anything with forest, you will be in trouble. We are telling you," the SC bench of Justices Arun Mishra and Deepak Gupta said.

BCCL

The court's stern warning was in the context of the Haryana Assembly passing the amendments in the Punjab Land Preservation Act (PLPA) which would have opened it for construction work in the ecological sensitive zone.

According to citizens and environmentalists the Haryana Government, under the pressure of the land mafia have been trying to open up the Aravallis, often referred to as the lungs of the NCR for construction.

BCCL

Solicitor general Tushar Mehta told the court that the state government would not do anything to harm Aravali hills and clarified that the bill was not passed to help anyone.

The Haryana Assembly had on February 27, passed amendments to the Act opening up thousands of acres of land in Gurgaon, Faridabad, Nuh, Mahendragarh and Rewari to real estate and other non-forest activity in the area that was protected under it for over a century.

Haryana Chief Minister ML Khattar had defended the move saying it was the"need of the hour", and had added that it was a "very old" Act and much has changed over a period of time.

BCCL

On March 1, the SC come down heavily on the government for passing amendments and said the state would not act on it without the court's permission.

In a related development the National Green Tribunal (NGT) in its final order has ruled that 52 acres of Aravali land in Faridabad which was cleared of trees in 2017, is a 'deemed forest'. The Haryana government had permitted cutting of trees on the land to build a housing project.

BCCL

Haryana government has been facing criticism from environmentalists and citizens for opening up protected areas for construction. With just 3.5 percent of its land as forest, Haryana has the worst forest cover in the country. Recently Gurugram was ranked the most polluted city in the world for 2018.
