Pakistan vs India: Kashmir row EXPLAINED - tensions could ESCALATE amid violent attacks

India: Pakistan navy claim Indian submarine is 'detected' nearby

top stories direct to your inbox SUBSCRIBE Invalid email Sign up to receive our rundown of the day'sdirect to your inbox We use your sign-up to provide content in ways you've consented to and to improve our understanding of you. This may include adverts from us and 3rd parties based on our understanding. You can unsubscribe at any time. More info

Kashmir is a hotly contested area, sharing borders with the states of Himachal Pradesh and Punjab to the south. India and Pakistan both lay claim to the territory, which has been divided and disputed since the partition of the British colony of India and the creation of independent India and Pakistan in 1947. Both South Asian countries rule the state of Jammu and Kashmir in part but claim it in full.



But in recent weeks tensions have escalated, with violent attacks being carried out in both India and Pakistan territories.



On Thursday, a grenade ‘attack’ in the Indian city of Jammu killed one person and injured at least 29.



The grenade explosion at a bus stand in the Indian city of Jammu killed one person and wounded at least 29 on Thursday, police said.



The attack came just weeks after a Pakistan-based militant group killed 40 paramilitary police in nearby Kashmir, almost sparking all-out war. Read More: Pakistan tells India it has power to ‘DESTROY’ submarines

Pakistan vs India: The two South Asian countries lay claim to Kashmir

But could tensions escalate to war?



Shoaib Bajwa, former Head of Intelligence for Deutsche Bank & now CEO at CTD Advisors, believes Pakistan could choose to escalate tensions further - but warned against such a route.



He also told Express.co.uk he was sceptical of Pakistan's involvement with the violent attacks, which came at a bad time for the region's economy.



Mr Bajwa said: “CTD Advisor’s sources on the ground indicate doubts as to whether the Pakistani state was involved in recent attacks on Indian forces in Pulwama, Kashmir.



“Saudi Arabia was visiting Pakistan with some significant investment promises so the timing of the attack in Pulwama was a real blow for Pakistan.



“From Pakistan’s perspective – the situation is very serious with the military and political leadership, they want to reply with some sort of military action and things could get worse if they decide to take that route.”



He also claimed the attacks served to heighten nationalist feelings in India, where a general election looms.



Mr Bajwa said: "“India’s Prime Minister Narendra Modi is losing political support.



"Recent election results and polls are showing that Congress is catching up to BJP and could be a good reason to blame Pakistan immediately and violating Pakistan’s air space to gain nationalist feelings back home."



Pakistan vs India: Tensions have escalated yet further, with more attacks

India and Pakistan have fought several wars over Kashmir and the last time Indian and Pakistani jets had bombed each other’s territory was in 1971 - in the depths of war.



More than 10,000 soldiers died and more than 100 planes were shot from the sky.



Shaz Nawaz, Director of AA Accountants in Peterborough, says his father moved from Kasmir to the UK in the 1960s.



He claims the issue of Kashmir "has been a bone of contention for India and Pakistan" since they gained independence in 1947.



India Pakistan: Captured pilot freed by military on Wagah border

After three wars, the situation has still not been resolved and now Mr Nawaz believes “the people of Kashmir have a right to self-determine their future".



He said: “What should happen is that a referendum must take place to enable and allow Kashmiris on both sides of the fence to decide her future.



“They can choose if they want to be part of India, Pakistan or alternatively establish a totally independent state.



“This to me seems like the best resolution to an issue which has been going on for far too long.



Pakistan vs India: Kashmiris should be given the choice says Mr Nawaz
