BEST threatens workers on strike with arrest

TimesView Mumbai’s once world-renowned public transport system has been laid to ruin because of mismanagement, political apathy and intransigent unions. Workers who are currently on strike should realise that the financiallycrippled BEST undertaking is sinking rapidly. A turnaround plan is desperately required to put it back on track again. Bus services have to improve to attract more commuters. While commuters are stranded and put to hardship, the cash-strapped BEST also loses crores of rupees in revenue. This is the second such strike in one-and-a-half years and the BEST management should have foreseen the crisis and prevented them from recurring.

MUMBAI: Lakhs of bus commuters had to switch to autos, taxis and trains as over 3,000 BEST buses went off the road on Tuesday. Traffic congestion worsened in the morning and evening peak hours as the number of vehicles out on the roads increased in the absence of the BEST fleet.Though the Shiv Sena union has deferred to the management, the strike will continue for the BEST Workers’ Union led by Shashank Rao. BEST general manager Surendrakumar Bagde told TOI he will initiate proceedings against the staffers of its largest union under the stringent MESMA ( Maharashtra Essential Services Maintenance Act) from Wednesday. The Act has provisions for arrest of union leaders instigating workers to go on strike."The industrial court has restrained the union and workers from going on strike. Since the order is in effect, there is no question of any negotiations,” he said. “Let them call off the strike and then come to me for any settlement.”Sources said with a split between the unions, police security will be beefed up to ensure there is no law and order problem on Wednesday morning when services resume.Sena union leader Suhas Samant said: “Buses will be operated on Wednesday with police protection and with grilles fitted on windscreens. The management has agreed to hold talks on employee issues with our union as we have withdrawn support to the strike.”Rao appeared undeterred and said the strike was total on Tuesday as not a single bus left any of the 27 depots. The morning muster at the depots showed only 13 drivers and four conductors reported for duty, but they were not given any buses to ply. “It is a peaceful protest outside the depot gates as workers have arrived but not resumed duties,” said Ramesh Kshirsagar of the BEST Workers’ Union at the Mulund depot on Tuesday morning.However, a few untoward incidents were reported. Late on Monday night, there were incidents of stone-pelting on 10 buses, in which a driver injured a right finger. “No passengers were injured,” said BEST spokesperson B A Zodage.On BEST’s request, staterun MSRTC ran special buses; railways also pitched in with extra services (see box). But it was not enough. Autorickshaw queues were very long in suburbs like Andheri, Borivli, Kandivli, Mulund, Kurla, Chembur, Ghatkopar. Ola and Uber cabs reported surge pricing in many areas.
