Meghan Markle, Priyanka Chopra Still Friends, Despite Report

Are Meghan Markle and Priyanka Chopra no longer friends? That’s the premise behind a new magazine report. Gossip Cop, however, can correct this inaccurate claim. We’re exclusively told it’s “untrue.”

According to Life & Style, while Serena Williams, Gayle King, and Amal Clooney made it to Markle’s baby shower in New York last month, Chopra was a no-show because she still has “hurt feelings” over the pregnant duchess not flying to Jodhpur, India for her marriage to Nick Jonas in December. An unnamed and untraceable “source” alleges Markle used the long flight to India as an excuse for not attending. “That was fine until Meghan decided to have her baby shower in NYC, which is almost the same distance as traveling from London to India,” adds the supposed tipster.

“It’s very high school, but Meghan really hurt Priyanka’s feelings,” the so-called “source” shares with the tabloid. “While she missed out on the social event of the year, Priyanka’s glad that she stick to her guns” by not attending, asserts the anonymous insider. Although highly dramatic, the publication’s tale is wrong.

Allow Gossip Cop to address some of the claims. For starters, while one can easily fly from London to New York, there are no direct flights from London to Jodhpur, where Chopra tied the knot. The quickest route, with a stop in Delhi, is 12 hours, which is actually a third longer than the trip to New York. But more significantly, the Center For Disease Control And Prevention (CDC) has warned pregnant travelers not to visit India because of the Zika virus.

The truth, which the tabloid seemingly didn’t fully present in terms of the travel and health issues that faced the pregnant royal, is Markle and Chopra are still very good friends. In reality, Chopra couldn’t make the baby shower because of work commitments in Los Angeles.

It bears mentioning the entire article is based on an unidentifiable “source.” And by the magazine’s account, the Indian actress is the aggrieved party with “hurt feelings.” However, as opposed to the tabloid, Gossip Cop received an on-the-record comment from Chopra’s rep, who exclusively tells us the outlet’s story is “untrue,” and that she is still close to Markle.

Life & Style has been wrong before about the Duchess of Sussex. For instance, the magazine reported more than nine months ago that Markle was expecting twins with Prince Harry. That was clearly inaccurate and the latest article about her no longer being friends with Chopra is similarly off-base.
