Enough is enough, we cannot keep suffering till eternity: PM on Pulwama

uttara@tribuneindia.com

Ghaziabad, March 10

Prime Minister Narendra Modi today sent across a strong message to terrorist forces targeting India, saying the country cannot keep suffering forever and that his government has taken some “strong decisions” against such elements.

“For many decades, the country and numerous families have suffered the wounds and pain given by terrorism, Naxalism and insurgency. What happened in Pulwama and Uri was heartbreaking.

“We cannot bear this pain till eternity. Enough is enough,” the Prime Minister said while addressing CISF personnel at its base here. The paramilitary force is celebrating the 50th year of its raising. The PM said following dastardly acts of terrorist violence, his government had taken some “strong decisions”, in an apparent reference to the IAF strike on terror camps after the Pulwama attack.

He said the government had adopted “a new policy” to act against terrorism and that it was its responsibility to live up to the expectations of the families of the personnel killed in the line of duty.

“Our government is purchasing all modern gadgets required by our security forces to tackle such challenges,” Modi said, mentioning the creation of a new facility in UP’s Amethi to manufacture modern guns.

The PM lauded the valour and dedication of CISF men and women who protect “vital assets” of the country in the face of a “hostile neighbour which does not have the capacity to fight a war”.

Modi also hit out at the abuse of “VIP culture”. “I’d say the biggest problem while carrying out your duty is people like me, VIPs. The VIP culture at times is the biggest threat to security,” he said. “When you frisk, some people get annoyed and even say ‘I will see you’ and you have to tell them that it is your duty which has to be done,” the PM added. — PTI

‘Strong Measures’

Someone, sometime, has to take a big decision (against such terror acts)... it is my privilege that with the support of crores of people of this country, we took some strong decisions. — Narendra Modi, PM
