After a jaguar attacked a woman attempting to take a selfie, an Arizona zoo warned guests about staying behind barriers

A 30-year-old woman was attacked by a jaguar after trying to take a selfie.

The attack happened at the Wildlife World Zoo, Aquarium, and Safari Park in Arizona.

The zoo warned guests about staying behind the barriers.

Over 3 million people read Morning Brew; you should too Loading Something is loading. Email address By clicking ‘Sign up’, you agree to receive marketing emails from Insider as well as other partner offers and accept our Terms of Service and Privacy Policy

An Arizona zoo is warning guests about staying behind barriers after a woman was attacked by a jaguar.

Wildlife World Zoo, Aquarium & Safari Park in Litchfield Park, Arizona confirmed that a visitor received non-threatening injuries Saturday after trying to take a selfie with a jaguar, and told visitors to mind the zoo barriers for their own safety.

"We regret to inform that this evening, before closing there was an incident reported involving a guest, who crossed over the barrier to get a photo, according to eye witnesses," the zoo tweeted. "The visitor sustained non-life threatening injuries to their arm from one of our female jaguars. At the request of the family, paramedics were called. At no time was the animal out of its enclosure. The incident is being fully investigated."

The zoo added: "Please understand why barriers are put in place. Sending prayers to the family tonight."

—Wildlife World Zoo, Aquarium & Safari Park (@ZooWildlife) March 10, 2019

According to Rural Metro Fire officials, the 30-year-old woman received a laceration on her arm around 6:45 p.m. when she tried to take a photo.

According to a bystander's account from ABC, the Jaguar didn't let go of the woman's arm until someone nearby distracted the animal with a water bottle. She suffered non-life-threatening injuries. The jaguar is reportedly fine.

Graphic video of the aftermath of the incident was posted to Twitter.

This is reportedly the second time the jaguar has attacked someone who crossed over a barrier this month.

Crossing over zoo barriers can result in death in some cases.

In January 2019, a man in India scaled a 20-foot wall and entered a lion's enclosure, as reported by The Sun. He was attacked by two lions in the enclosure and later died at the hospital.
