Voters will do third surgical strike on Oppn., says Swaraj

Indian voters will conduct the third surgical strike on the intentions of Opposition parties, Union Minister of External Affairs Sushma Swaraj said in Mumbai on Sunday.

“This is my first rally to ensure Narendra Modi remains the Prime Minister of the country. The entire nation is full of patriotism and I congratulate Modiji for the commitment that he has shown towards national security after incidents in Uri and Pulwama,” Ms. Swaraj said at a conclave of women workers of the Bharatiya Janata Party (BJP).

She said, “The Indian voters will lead the third surgical strike. That strike will be carried out on the intentions of the opposition parties, by giving us the majority in the elections.”

“Should we ask questions about whether our jawans counted the bodies (after dropping bombs on terror camps) or return safely after carrying out the air strike? BJP workers should ask counter-questions to those who raise doubts about the impact of our air strike,” Ms. Swaraj said.

She appealed to the BJP workers to ask questions to voters. “We should ask questions like whether you (voter) will support parties that side with separatists. We should ask people whether they want to vote for those who question the valour of our jawans.”

Hinting that the issue of surgical strike will be on the BJP’s election agenda, Ms. Swaraj said, “We will have two leaflets of which one will be about these logical counter statements (about surgical strike). BJP workers should use it during the poll campaign. The other leaflet will be about the government welfare schemes for women,” she said.

CM slams Raj Thackeray

Chief Minister Devendra Fadnavis, who attended the programme, slammed Maharashtra Navnirman Sena (MNS) chief Raj Thackeray for calling him a ‘parrort’ who reads the script given by Nationalist Congress Party (NCP) president Sharad Pawar. “Baramati is always in search of a new parrot. There are certain things that they cannot say, but they are making the parrot speak against the BJP for them. Being an artist, he (Raj) can read out a script well. Now-a-days, his script is coming from Baramati,” said Mr. Fadnavis, without naming Mr. Pawar, who hails from Baramati.

Mr. Thackeray on Sunday launched a scathing attack on the BJP and Mr. Modi, while addressing party workers on the 13th foundation day of the MNS.
