KP demands better stray dog sterilisation

Rising number of canines on the streets of this area prompts residents to ask PMC to resolve the matter in a humane way



The Pune Municipal Corporation’s (PMC) laxity and inability when it comes to implementing a proper stray dog sterilisation, shelter and adoption programme has now led to an increase in the canine population on the streets of Koregaon Park, leading to an unfortunate human-animal conflict.



The civic health department claims it is attempting to implement existing programmes, but so far, has provided no concrete evidence to bolster this declaration. Meanwhile, area residents of and commuters through the area have cited instances of packs displaying aggression, given that most citizens are unaware of how to interact with them. Now, people have demanded that PMC get its act together and tackle this development in an organised and humane manner.



“The Burning Ghat area on KP’s South Main Road, in particular, has large groups of strays,” said resident Gautam Kukreja, adding, “Since garbage is always lying around in our city, the hungry dogs get into it and scatter it, which creates health issues. As is in their nature, they also tend to chase speeding vehicles, and sometimes come in the way. They are also in danger of being run over, and the motorists are at risk of being hurt. It is a double-edged sword.”



He further said, “Some intolerant folks want them out of the area, but this relocation is illegal for a reason. What we really need is a proper sterilisation and rehabilitation programme. Many animal welfare groups over the recent years have done good work in this field, but much more remains to be done, and the administration needs to lend a proper helping hand, for which we pay them taxes. Efforts also need to be taken for adoption. We need to all deal with this with compassion and humanity.”



The PMC in-charge for stray animal control, Dr PN Wagh, said, “We are working hard towards resolving this matter in our municipal limits. We also recently tackled reports in areas like Lohegaon and Wanowrie. Whenever we receive complaints, we increase focus on that area. I will look into this.”


