Day after announcement of poll dates, Shiv Sena attacks BJP for 'using sacrifice of martyrs for votes'

Shiv Sena chief Uddhav Thackeray and BJP chief Amit Shah during their meeting in Mumbai (file photo). The two parties will contest Lok Sabha polls 2019 together | Photo Credit: ANI

Mumbai: A day after The Election Commission (EC) announced dates for Lok Sabha polls 2019, Bharatiya Janata Party's (BJP) ally Shiv Sena has hit out at the former saying that those 'seeking votes on the basis of the martyrdom of brave jawans' are 'culprits' and should be held responsible for politicising the sacrifice of our brave-hearts. In an editorial in Shiv Sena mouthpiece Saamana, Uddhav Thackeray's party says that those 'questioning the authenticity' of air strike are equally responsible for 'insulting' the valour of our forces.

"To blame political opponents by calling them anti-nationals is inappropriate. It is a breach of freedom of expression. There has been a rise in the number of cases wherein politicians have claimed credit for the post-Pulwama attack on Pakistan. Many leaders have also put up banners claiming that it was their political parties — and not the Indian Armed Forces — which took revenge of the Pulwama attack (sic)," the Sena mouthpiece said in an editorial on Monday.

"Many BJP MPs have been addressing rallies wearing Indian Army fatigues. Delhi MP Manoj Tiwari was recently seen wearing a military uniform and urging people to vote for the BJP... Acts such as these substantiate the allegations by the opposition parties that the air strikes were conducted for political gains," the editorial says.

The editorial piece comes just a day after the EC announced dates for Lok Sabha polls 2019. In Maharashtra, where Shiv Sena is ain alliance with the BJP, the elections will be held in four phases between April 11-29. Despite airing voices of discontent, the two parties sealed a deal to face the ballot together. While Shiv Sena will be contesting on 23 Lok Sabha seats in Maharashtra, the BJP will be fighting on 25 seats.
