Don’t Politicise Surgical Strikes: BJP is undermining India’s strategic options by making them a poll issue

It is now clear that the post-Pulwama surgical strike is going to be a poll issue for BJP. In fact, at a recent event in Greater Noida, UP, PM Narendra Modi spoke of how his government had outwitted Pakistan. He said that Islamabad was bracing for a land retaliation but was struck from the air. His exact words were, “They were thinking that Modi carried out surgical strikes last time and the same would happen the second time.” Clear from this statement is the fact that Modi is taking full credit for the military operation, even though he says he isn’t.

Meanwhile, we also had Union home minister Rajnath Singh asserting in Mangaluru that three, not two, surgical strikes were carried out by India in the last five years. But there is a good reason why military operations should not be politicised. First, if the party in power is going to play this game then the opposition too won’t sit quietly. We have already seen some leaders ask for details about the Balakot surgical strike. This is a slippery slope because it may not be prudent to provide full operational details. But if the government isn’t forthcoming then it will create more doubts. Therefore, the party in power should refrain from touting such operations for political gains.

Second, politicising also raises expectations. In the India-Pakistan context, if there is another terror attack, the government will be compelled to do another surgical strike. But there is a limit to this. After all, both India and Pakistan are nuclear powers. And if things go out of hand then we are looking at a catastrophe involving millions of people. Besides, in the post-Balakot air skirmishes, one of our pilots was captured. What if Pakistan didn’t return him? What if, God forbid, something had happened to him? Who would have taken responsibility for him and his family? Politicisation leads to miscalculations. Military operations should be solely left to the generals.

Lastly, all military operations need to have a strategic calculation. And so far there is no evidence to suggest that Pakistan will change its ways and stop sheltering anti-India terrorists. In such a scenario, won’t Modi’s bravado be exposed if there is another Pulwama-like terror attack? Therefore, it is best to leave military operations in the domain of the military itself. Politicising them only leads to the ugliness that besmirches the military.

Facebook Twitter Linkedin Email Disclaimer Views expressed above are the author's own.
