First man to give birth in UK warns others not to try it because it’s ‘really hard’

THE first man to give birth in the UK has warned against others doing it as it was "really hard".

Hayden Cross appeared on Lorraine this morning to talk through the highs and lows of having his baby girl, Trinity-Leigh.

4 Hayden Cross became the first UK man to give birth two years ago Credit: refer to caption.

He had decided to pause his transition and become pregnant after the NHS wouldn't freeze his eggs.

Hayden, who was born Paige, became the first man to give birth last year, and revealed to Lorraine despite being thrilled to be a dad, he wouldn't advise others to do the same.

He said: "I don't think I was ready at the time, 100 per cent but now everything's just gone to plan, fell into place and getting on great.

"I'm not going to lie it was really strange and there was a lot of emotions and a lot of feelings and I wouldn't advise anyone to do it cos it was really hard but if you do make sure you seek the right support.

4 He appeared on Lorraine this morning to talk about his experience and his baby girl Credit: Rex Features

4 Hayden Cross with Trinity-Leigh

"The NHS now actually support people with it."

Baby Trinity was in the studio but didn't spend too long on screen, as she became upset after an early start.

Hayden explained he had to have a C-section when she was born, which he preferred as found the idea of giving birth difficult.

The 22-year-old said despite the difficult journey "it's been great", adding "I'm happy and my daughter is happy and that's all that matters".

He added: "We're really close to my mum as my mum had a little boy around the same time.

"Our relationship is so much stronger now, I think it brought us together so it's really positive."

Of the tough pregnancy he said: "It was a really big battle but it was a battle worth it.

"I've had my top surgery done already and can have my bottom surgery when I'm ready.

"I want to go back to work eventually I want to try to set up my own business so in the future I can pass it down to Trinity.

"I need to make sure I'm living the right life and the good life for her."

Hayden used an anonymous sperm donor he found on Facebook Credit: News Group Newspapers Ltd

4 Hayden's baby scans showing daughter Trinity-Leigh in his womb Credit: News Group Newspapers Ltd

Hayden was brought up in Gloucester with his parents, sister Sky and brothers Jordan and Robert in a three-bedroom home.

The 21-year-old was on the NHS gender transition process, which costs an average of £29,000, and had been taking male hormones ahead of an operation to remove his breasts and ovaries.

But after finding a sperm donor on Facebook, he fell pregnant.

Now he has had his top surgery and plans to have his bottom surgery when he is ready.

Hayden said he was bombarded with death threats from around the world after going public with his pregnancy.

He said he was trying to ignore “hundreds” of sick threats sent to him over social media – some from as far as India and Australia.

The 22-year-old said: “I have the best thing in the world now – they only have hate."

We pay for your stories! Do you have a story for The Sun Online news team? Email us at tips@the-sun.co.uk or call 0207 782 4368. You can WhatsApp us on 07810 791 502. We pay for videos too. Click here to upload yours.
