Lok Sabha polls: Choice is between Modi and chaos, says Arun Jaitley

uttara@tribuneindia.com

Vibha Sharma

Tribune News Service

New Delhi, March 11

Senior Bharatiya Janata Party leader Arun Jaitley said on Monday that Prime Minister Narendra Modi had taken the country from being one that defended itself against acts of terror to one that attacked insurgency at its very “origin”.

In a post he wrote on Facebook as his party prepares to face its biggest challenge in five years, Jaitley said the country now had a choice between Modi and “chaos”. He also took down opposition parties in the post, calling Congress president Rahul Gandhi an “inadequate leader” whose “lack of understanding of issues was frightening”, and calling opposition’s efforts to stitch up a “mahaghatbandhan”—a grand coalition— “self destructive”, because “there is no alternative” to Modi.

“Contest is between a leader in whose hand the country is developing and secure. He is trusted. Against him it is no one projected leader. There are multiple leaders, each trying to outwit the other. They can only promise a temporary Government if we go by the past precedents. One can be certain of chaos. The choice is clear – it is either Modi or chaos,” Jaitley wrote.

He counted off the “merits” of having Prime Minister Narendra Modi as a national and world leader.

“Even his critics are bewildered by his evolution of his national security doctrine. He has evolved India from a nation which only defended itself domestically against terror through intelligence and security network and isolated Pakistan at the global level to a nation which is capable of destroying terror at the points of its’ origin. The success of the surgical strikes of 2016 and the air strikes of 2019 points to this direction”.

He then criticised the opposition coalition for being riven by contradictions in its stand. As examples, he cited the alliance of previously arch rivals Bahujan Samaj Party and Samajwadi Party. He said the two parties would to fight the Congress in Uttar Pradesh for the general elections, but would willingly join the grand old party should such a need arise.

Another example he cited was the Congress and Left parties—while in West Bengal, the Congress-Left alliance in West Bengal was currently taking on the ruling-Trinamool Congress, the two parties, under their United Democratic Front and the Left Democratic Front, were arch rivals and were fighting one another in Kerala. Then he said there the time in November last year that Peoples Democratic Party tried ally with rivals National Conference and the Congress to establish a government in the state.

He said that in addition, the leadership in the rival “ghatbandhan” was a puzzle, with several leaders, such as TMC’s Mamata Banerjee, already positioning herself as the “sutradhar” (narrator)—in the alliance.

“She won’t concede a single seat either to the Congress or the Left in West Bengal but will want them to be her pillion riders if she drives the vehicle. Her instinctive comments on policy issues are retrograde,” he wrote.

“Behan Mayawati, the leader of the BSP, was wiped out in the last Lok Sabha elections. She changed her strategy. She wants a strong BSP and a weak Congress. She holds her cards close to her chest. She will open them only after the results are declared. She has had a strategic ‘alliance of compulsion’ with the Samajwadi Party in Uttar Pradesh but the scars of her historical conflict with its allies have not washed away. She wants a strong BSP and a weak Congress. Leaders with flexible ideologies think that they are acceptable to all,” he wrote in the post.

He said the alliance was unlikely to hold because it had an array of “highly ambitious, self-centered and maverick leaders”, none of who would concede power to the other.

“None of the political parties is capable of any significant number of seats. The alliance will not have a stable nucleus… Barring the Congress and the Left, most of them have done political business with the BJP in the past. Their ideologies and commitment to their constituents are widely different.”

The country will vote in general elections that begin on April 11. The seven-phase elections end on May 19, and votes would be counted on May 23.
