US on board as China remains non-committal on Masood blacklisting

rchopra@tribunemail.com

Sandeep Dikshit

Tribune News Service

New Delhi, March 11

The US indicated complete backing to India’s quest to list Jaish-e-Mohammed chief Massod Azhar as an international terrorist but China, which has thrice vetoed the proposal at the UN Security Council, remained ambiguous.

Meanwhile, PM Modi worked the third vector in the dispute by speaking to the Crown Prince of Abu Dhabi who played a pivotal role in inviting India for Organisation of Islamic Countries (OIC) ministerial meeting that Pakistan sat out in protest.

After a meeting with US Secretary of State Mike Pompeo and Foreign Secretary Vijay Gokhale in Washington, an Indian readout said the two agreed that those who support or abet terrorism in any form should be held accountable.

India has held Masood responsible for the Pulwama outrage and wants firm action against him by both Pakistan and the international community.

But China cloaked its position in ambiguity.

“China (has) adopted a responsible attitude, follows the rules of the procedure of the committee and participated in the discussions in a responsible manner. Only through discussions can we come up with a responsible solution,” said a Chinese Foreign Office spokesperson.

Though it remains to be seen if the US can prevail over China to drop its objections about listing Masood at UNSC, Pompeo told Gokhale that he understood India’s concerns regarding cross-border terrorism.

They agreed that Pakistan needs to take concerted action to dismantle the terrorist infrastructure and to deny safe haven to all terrorist groups in its territory.

Gokhale will also meet senior US Foreign Ministry officials, Under Secretary of State for Political Affairs David Hale and Under Secretary of State for Arms Control and International Security Andrea Thompson.



Pompeo and Gokhale expressed satisfaction over the significant progress and the quality of the India-US Strategic Partnership since the first ever Ministerial 2+2 Dialogue six months back.

They also discussed other issues of mutual interest including Afghanistan and cooperation in the Indo-Pacific region, and agreed to closely work together in this regard.

In response to Secretary Pompeo’s reference to bilateral trade matters, Gokhale underscored the significant reduction in trade deficit in the last three years and conveyed India’s willingness to remain engaged with the US for a meaningful and mutually acceptable package on trade issues.
