BJP, NCP trade barbs after Sharad Pawar's withdrawal from Lok Sabha polls

Soon after Nationalist Congress Party (NCP) president Sharad Pawar announced he will not be contesting the Lok Sabha polls, a war of words erupted between the Bhartiya Janata Party (BJP) and NCP.

While the BJP has claimed Pawar was scared to contest, NCP hit back at the BJP saying that apart from Madha, the NCP will win maximum seats from Maharashtra.

Earlier in the day, Sharad Pawar announced he will not contest from Madha constituency in western Maharashtra. Pawar's stand was a complete U-turn from his earlier stand.

After the 2014 election, Pawar had announced he will not contest any direct elections. Last month he announced that party workers want him to contest from the Madha seat.

But on Monday he announced that he is not contesting the seat. Pawar's flip flop gave a ready opportunity for the BJP to attack the NCP president.

Maharashtra Chief Minister Devendra Fadnavis himself led the pack of leaders from BJP targeting Pawar. "Modiji once said that Mr Pawar knows in advance the direction of wind. with his decision to withdraw, it is clear which way the winds are blowing. This is a first victory for our alliance in Maharashtra," Fadnavis told reporters in Mumbai.

Co-operatives Minister Subhash Deshmukh, who is also the probable candidate from Madha seat, too attacked Pawar saying the NCP chief was scared to contest from the seat.

"Pawar had taken meetings across the constituency for last one month. He got a feedback that he will lose from the seat and that's why he has taken the decision to withdraw," Deshmukh said.

Meanwhile the NCP was red faced at the attack on its leader. Leader of Opposition in the Legislative Council, Dhananjay Munde hit back at the BJP.

"Pawar Saheb has the vigour to face and return any storm. Someone who has won 14 back-to-back elections does not get scared by feeble winds. We will not just win Madha, but will also win the rest of Maharashtra under his guidance. And we will deliver the sweets of victory at your official bungalow- Varsha," Munde said.
