CWC in Gujarat meet to come out with chargesheet against Modi govt

Congress party will come out with a list of failures of ruling Bharatiya Janta Party (BJP) during the meeting of Congress Working Committee (CWC) in Ahmedabad on Tuesday. It is after a gap of 58 years that CWC meeting is being held in Gujarat. The meet plans to take the fight to Prime Minister Narendra Modi, by organising CWC meeting in his home state where he was the chief minister between 2001 and 2014. The CWC meeting and the public meeting on the outskirts of the city will, for the first time, bring Congress president Rahul Gandhi, UPA chairperson Sonia Gandhi, former Prime Minister Manmohan Singh and Congress general secretary Priyanka Gandhi on the same stage.

Addressing media persons in the city on the eve of the meeting, Rajeev Satav said that just as Mahatma Gandhi had begun his Dandi March, launching Civil Disobedience Movement against the British government on March 12, CWC meeting and the public meeting will play a key role in defeating BJP-led NDA government in Delhi. "Gujarat, under the leadership of Mahatma Gandhi and Sardar Patel had given a direction to the country.

We are sure that Tuesday's CWC meet will play an important role in shaping the future of the country," said Satav. This will be the first public meeting of the party after the formal announcement of election schedule for Lok Sabha.

These will be attended by chief ministers of Congress-ruled states as well as party leaders from all over the country. Party cadres are excited about the meeting, he said. Patidar leader Hardik Patel will formally join Congress on Tuesday. The CWC meeting will come out with the failures of the Modi government at the centre. Some of the issues to be taken up include corruption (Rafale deal), failure of the government to tackle corruption, increasing farm distress and lack of new job creation for the youth among others. "BJP has been in the driving seat. It has a reply. People are unhappy," said Satav.

Amit Chavda, president of Gujarat Pradesh Congress Committee said that the agenda of the party and the list of people-friendly measures the party will take after coming to power will also be announced on Tuesday.

Schedule
