Dalai Lama Current Affairs, GK & News

Dalai Lama Current Affairs, GK & News

On March 22, 2021, US President Joe Biden kick started a two-day Earth Day Summit. During the Summit, the President pledged to halve the US emissions by the end of the decade. Key Highlights The United States and the other countries increased their targets of slashing the Greenhouse gas emissions. The US President Joe Biden ..

Month: Current Affairs - April, 2021

Category: Environment Current Affairs • Important Days & Events Current Affairs • International Current Affairs • Summits and Conferences

Topics: Climate change • Dalai Lama • earth day summit • Global warming • Greenhouse gas emissions • World Earth Day • World Leaders Summit

The Tibetan spiritual leader the Dalai Lama have recently launched his new book “The Little Book of Encouragement”. The book comprises of 130 quotes. The book has been edited by Renuka Singh while published by Penguin Random House. Highlights The Dalai Lama while launching the book highlighted that, he is one among more than seven ..

Month: Current Affairs - February, 2021

Category: Art & Culture Current Affairs • Persons in News

Topics: 14th Dalai Lama • Bodhisattvas • Dalai Lama • Persons in News • Tenzin Gyatso • The Little Book of Encouragement

The United States Senate has recently passed the Tibetan policy and support act of 2020. The bill was already passed in the house of representatives of the United States in January, 2020. Key features of the Act The Tibetan Policy and Support Act, 2020 is based on the Tibet Policy Act of 2002. The act ..

Month: Current Affairs - December, 2020

Category: International Current Affairs • Legal & Constitution Current Affairs

Topics: China-Tibet • Dalai Lama • Government of the United States • In Tibet • Tibet

Reciprocal Access to Tibet Act is a US law that was enacted in December 2018 by the Trump Administration. This law calls for denying access to the US for Chinese officials known to be involved in restricting visits to the Tibet. The objective of this law is to push China to ensure greater access and ..

Month: Current Affairs - December, 2020

Category: International Current Affairs

Topics: 14th Dalai Lama • China-Tibet • Dalai Lama • India-China border dispute • Reciprocal Access to Tibet Act • Tibet • Tibetan Plateau

Vesak, the Day of Full Moon is the most sacred day to the Buddhists all over the world. On this day, Lord Gautham Buddha attained enlightenment. The Day is commemorated by the United Nations every year. Highlights The Day if being celebrated by the United Nations since 2000. The resolution to celebrate the day was ..

Month: Current Affairs - May, 2020

Category: Important Days & Events Current Affairs

Topics: Buddhism • China • Dalai Lama • Summit • Tibet • United Nations • Vesak
