‘No alliance with Kejriwal or with anybody,’ Amarinder Singh says Congress will fight alone in Punjab

“The Congress did not need any alliance in Punjab, nor was it in talks with any party on the same,” he said.

Punjab Chief Minister, Amarinder Singh on Tuesday rejected speculations about any alliance with the Aam Aadmi Party in Punjab for the Lok Sabha 2019 elections. He added that the Congress party will fight alone in the state.

“Nothing at all. We have no alliance with Kejriwal or with anybody. We will contest on our own and win,” ANI quoted Punjab CM as saying.

Singh said that Congress party does not need any alliance and there are no talks with any other party.

“The Congress did not need any alliance in Punjab, nor was it in talks with any party on the same,” he said.

Punjab CM Captain Amarinder Singh on if there will be an alliance with AAP in Punjab: Nothing at all. We have no alliance with Kejriwal or with anybody. We will contest on our own and win. #LokSabhaElections2019 pic.twitter.com/osopEUzbZ5 — ANI (@ANI) March 12, 2019

Asked about who the party’s star campaigner would be in the state for the general elections, the chief minister said it was up to the Congress high command to decide the names of the key campaigners.

Earlier in the day, AAP supremo Arvind Kejriwal said in Delhi that his party and a breakaway outfit of the Shiromani Akali Dal (SAD) are in talks for an alliance in Punjab for the Lok Sabha polls.

Recently, in a snub to the Kejriwal-led party, Congress had ruled out any alliance with the ruling Aam Aadmi Party in Delhi. Former Delhi chief minister Sheila Dikshit made the announcement, that a unanimous decision has been taken following a meeting with Congress president Rahul Gandhi and there will be no alliance with AAP in Delhi.

The development came days after the AAP declared six candidates for the general elections for the constituencies of the national capital.

Meanwhile, an alliance between Congress and the AAP in the national capital would have required both parties to shed old baggage after their bitter fallout in 2014. Both parties had entered a post-poll alliance to form a government in Delhi under Arvind Kejriwal’s leadership.

The alliance lasted a total of 49 days and the government fell.
