Oppsition Fears the 'Chowkidar', ganging up to throw him out, says Modi

AGRA: Taking the opposition head-on on various issues, including the controversial Rafale deal, reservation for upper castes and GST, Prime Minister, Narendra Modi , on Wednesday accused various political parties of ganging up against the “Chowkidar” in order to cover their own misdeeds.He also hailed passage of the bill providing 10% reservation to upper caste poor in the Lok Sabha on Tuesday and said that this was a step towards a Constitutional Amendment to ensure that this quota remains over and above the 50% reservation given to SC/ST and backwards.While Modi, who launched the party’s poll campaign in the state with a massive public rally at Kothi Meena bazar ground, refrained from mentioning the name “Rafale”, he targeted the Congress by referring to Defence Minister, Nirmala Sitharaman ’s recent response to the debate on the deal in the Lok Sabha and claimed that she had demolished “every lie” perpetrated by the opposition. He dubbed the opposition’s subsequent barbs against Sitharaman as an insult to the entire women community of the country and said that it was a matter of pride that India for the first time in history had a woman defence minister. “She is a symbol of women empowerment and those who are targeting her are insulting the entire women community of the country”, he said.Claiming that the Congress was propagating these lies on every forum and using the social media to spread them, Modi, in his characteristic style of clapping his hands, “they are scared since their confidante in the helicopter deal has been caught and they fear being exposed”. While he neither named the AgustaWestland deal or the alleged middle man Christian Michel, who was recently deported from Dubai, Modi said that the Congress had rushed their own lawyer to save him.“What does this indicate. Doesn’t it expose the Congress,” asked Modi from the audience, which shouted “Modi, Modi … He said the opposition had thought that he too was a run of the mill politician who would not expose and punish his opponents for their misdeeds. “They have realised in these four and half years that I will not spare them and hence they are adopting evey tactics to save themselves”.The Prime Minister also took a dig at the proposed SP-BSP alliance in UP and said that the two, who could not see eye to eye, had joined hands as they are afraid of the chowkidar. Referring to the 1995 incident when Mayawati was targeted by SP workers in Lucknow after she withdrew her support to Mulayam Singh, Modi, without naming anyone, sarcastically said, “They have even forgotten the humiliation of the circuit house”. “Their sole motive to cover each other's black deeds. UP mein Baalu, Maurang khaane waalon ne haath mila liya hai," (in UP those who ate (got kickbacks) in mining and sand have joined hands together).Responding to SP-BSP’s claims that the recent CBI raids in the alleged mining scams during Akhilesh’ tenure are “political vendetta’, Modi said, “what do they think that investigating agencies will stop looking into their scams”. He said there was no question that this will happen and categorically stated that the investigations will continue and the guilty will be punished.On the reservation for the economically weaker sections of the upper castes, Modi said this was a long pending demand that his government had met. He said he had always maintained including when he was the Chief Minister that such a reservation could not be granted without a constitutional amendment and he is happy that as a PM he has been able to implement it. He said, “we have done this reservation without depriving anyone – be it the SC, the ST or the backward classes – of their rights. We will increase 10% seats in educational institutes to ensure that every one gets what they are entitled to”.Using that opposition criticism over the timing of this announcement to once again propagate his idea of simultaneous elections for Lok Sabha and assemblies, Modi said, “we are perpetually in election mode and the nation can’t afford that”. He said, “If I had announced this policy three months earlier, I would have been accused of using it for the assembly elections in MP and other states. If I had done it even before, there were Karnataka elections”.
