‘We must oust RSS-BJP ideology’

Sounding party’s poll bugle from PM’s home turf, Rahul Gandhi banks on the Rs 15-lakh promise, GST, Pulwama attack and Rafale to attack the BJP



AHMEDABAD The crucial Congress working committee (CWC) meeting held at the Sardar Patel National Memorial in Prime Minister Narendra Modi’s home state, party chief Rahul Gandhi said no sacrifice was too great to defeat the ideology of RSS and BJP even as the party resolved to fight against “fascism, hatred, anger and divisiveness”.



The Congress also accused Modi of “cynically exploiting” the issue of national security to divert attention from his “colossal failures” and “persistent falsehoods” and asserted it won’t allow him to befool the people again.



Addressing a huge public rally at Adalaj on the outskirts of Ahmedabad on Tuesday, Rahul said, “When we form the next government after the polls, we will deliver farm loan waiver, introduce minimum income guarantee scheme and come out with a simplified ‘single-tax’ GST instead of the complex five-slab GST at present.”



Talking about reason behind holding the CWC in PM’s home turf, he said, “India is seeing a fight between two ideologies.



One propagated by Mahatma Gandhi to give freedom to the country and the other followed by the Modi government which is bent on destroying India’s institutions by spreading hatred and suppressing real issues. We will start our righteous fight from Gujarat and emerge victorious.”



Countering Modi’s rhetoric on defending India against terrorism, Gandhi said Masood Azhar was captured and locked in jail during the Congress government but the incumbent National Security Advisor Ajit Doval escorted him to Kandhar in a special aircraft.



Calling “Modi’s promise” of putting Rs 15 lakh in the bank account of every citizen a hollow one, he questioned the audience whether they had got the money as promised in 2014, drawing a huge “no”, from the audience.



On the fight against corruption, he said Modi makes tall proclamations on one hand while handing out favours to the likes of Nirav Modi, Mehul Chokshi, Anil Ambani and Gautam Adani on the other.



“Modi calls them Niravbhai, Mehulbhai, Anilbhai... They all give him money,” he alleged. The Congress president also promised to do “something historic” once his party came to power.



“Modi waived loans worth Rs 3.5 lakh crore of 15 industrialists...he gave money to the rich, but Congress is going to give money to farmers and small businessmen. I assure you that we will form the government in 2019 and implement minimum income guarantee scheme across the nation and will give money directly into bank accounts of the poor,” he said.



On Rafale, he accused Modi of stealing Rs 30,000 crore from the IAF and doling it out to Anil Ambani. “Building fighter jets is beyond Anil Ambani, he cannot make planes even from paper,” he said, drawing loud cheer from the audience.



At one point, when he began hitting out at Modi with the “chowkidar jibe”, the crowds roared back with “chor hain”. He cheekily said, “You people understand what I am saying, so I need not talk more.”



Extolling the newly-formed Congress governments in Rajasthan, Madhya Pradesh and Chhattisgarh that waived farmers’ loans in two days after coming to power he said: “I feel bad for being unable to deliver the same relief to farmers of Gujarat.” AMB


