Probe Robert Vadra, but investigate, Modi too says Rahul Gandhi in Tamil Nadu

Probe Robert Vadra, but investigate, Modi too says Rahul Gandhi in Tamil Nadu

India

oi-Deepika S

Chennai, Mar 13: Congress chief Rahul Gandhi, who is in Chennai today as part of his campaign for next month's national election, addressed hundreds of students at Stella Maris College in Tamil Nadu's Chennai on Wednesday.

Addressing women students at the Stella Maris College here, he said the Congress will change the mood of the country and make people feel happy and empowered.

'No sacrifice too big to win battle', says Rahul Gandhi after key Congress meet

He asked the gathering, "Did you like demonetisaton?" When the audience answered, "No", he said, "I think it's pretty clear the damage demonetisaton did. PM should have taken your advice." Gandhi, who asked the students to challenge him and "make him uncomfortable", also questioned whether the prime minister could stand in a large audience and answer people's questions.

On Kahmiri policy

"The moment PM Modi came to power he made a big mistake...he allied with the PDP which has ideologies that are opposite to India...Kashmir is burning today because of PM Modi's policies...you can't fight terror with on off-policy we need a strategy...42 jawans lost their lives in Pulwama, its the govt's job to protect its people," Gandhi said over the Kashmir issue.

On Robert Vadra

Gandhi, who asked students to refer to him as Rahul, said the law must apply to everybody and not be applied selectively.

"Law must apply to everybody, not be applied selectively. Probe Robert Vadra but investigate Prime Minister Narendra Modi as well," he said. "I will be the first person to say it... investigate Robert Vadra but also investigate Prime Minister Narendra Modi," he said.

In response to a question, he said he had learnt the lessons of humility and love from his mother Sonia Gandhi.

On Economic growth

"You can't have a fearful atmosphere and expect economic growth, which is directly related to the mood of the country," Rahul Gandhi told Chennai students.

On PM Modi's hug

Rahul Gandhi when asked why he hugged PM Modi said, "I was watching the PM giving the speech. I don't have any animosity towards him. I could see the PM was very angry and was speaking against the Congress party. But, inside me I was feeling affection for him. This man is not able to see the beauty of the world. So I thought that atleast my part my side I should show affection. I genuinely feel love for the man."

On Education and women empowerment

"We are convinced India is spending less on education, our target is 6 per cent. It is not only about spending money on education, but also independence on education. All our educational institutions should be able to challenge us...I want you all to make me uncomfortable," Rahul Gandhi's replied to a question on education in India.

To another question related to women's empowerment, he declared, "In 2019, we are going to pass the Women's Reservation bill, they will receive 33% reservation in jobs."

Later in the day, Gandhi will hold a press conference at Hotel Le Meridien in Chennai and is scheduled to address a public rally at Scott Christian College ground in Kanyakumari's Nagercoil.

Besides Rahul Gandhi, DMK president M K Stalin, MDMK chief Vaiko and Left party leaders would participate in the meeting.

The Congress will fight the elections as part of DMK-led front that includes MDMK, CPI, CPI-M, VCK, IUML, IJK and KDMK.

On Tuesday, the Congress Working Committee (CWC) met in Ahmedabad and resolved to "defeat the RSS/BJP ideology of fascism, hatred, anger and divisiveness". Members agreed that "no sacrifice is too great in this endeavour to defeat the ideology of RSS/BJP, no effort too little; this battle will be won".

The meeting, chaired by Rahul Gandhi, was held two days after the Election Commission announced that Lok Sabha polls will be held in seven phases from April 11 to May 19 and counting on May 23.
