Is the Opposition Falling Prey to Narendra Modi’s Pied Piper Act?

Just as the legendary Pied Piper of Hamelin blew his pipe to lure troublesome rodents out of a city, Prime Minister Narendra Modi, the master storyteller, has set, changed and reset the national agenda each time the opposition parties appeared to get a grip on things that did not go well over the past five years.

And the worst performer has been the Congress, which appears to be quite clueless about the issues that it wants to bring to the forefront as the country prepares for yet another battle at the hustings in less than a month’s time. While the regional parties have stuck to their local agendas, others like the SP and the BSP have also limited their narratives that would appeal to their core constituents.

Unfortunately, the Congress appears to have faltered time and again in setting the tone and narrative for their attempt to unseat the BJP.

This, despite the fact that the grand old party did astound political pundits by ousting the ruling party from three states, just about three months ago – all based on a single poll plank of rural distress and unemployment.

In fact, it isn’t in the least surprising that the Congress leadership is stumped. Because, Narendra Modi seldom campaigns during elections. He does so every time an opportunity presents itself and ensures that the narrative is very simple. Over the past five years, he has used the elementary theme of story-telling – that of a long-suffering heroic character who is traumatised by a villain or villains. In other words, the ‘Good Man’ vs. ‘Bad Man’ tale!

Just when the opposition was rallying around a single format of calling the bluff on Modi’s ‘Acche Din’ promises came the terror attack in Pulwama, the subsequent airstrikes, and the arrest and release of Wing Commander Abhinandan, followed by lots of chest-thumping that forced the Congress to toe the line of national security.

Modi’s ploy of subtly claiming victory in the border skirmish with Pakistan after the airstrikes would have been a masterstroke but for the chaos that broke out immediately thereafter when every puny leader of the ruling party went to town leaking information and misinformation in equal measure, thus possibly diluting the narrative for the ruling party.

Story continues

On its part, the Congress stood behind the government in the name of national security and missed out on propagating its own “Where is Acche Din” agenda that got them victories in December last year. Suddenly, the Pied Piper had changed the tune on the flute and everyone was forced to dance to it, as if under a trance.

Even when the election dates have been announced, there seems to be no coherence within the opposition about how they should strategise the messaging against the ruling party. In other words, the BJP seems to crossed the first couple of hurdles while the opposition remains at the starting gate, arguing about seats and other sundry matters.

And how does the Congress plan to approach the campaign phase of these elections? In the run up to the state assembly polls, party president Rahul Gandhi suddenly began visiting temples. There were stories about his Brahminic antecedents and his love for the cows. Detractors created memes claiming that the party had become Congress plus Janeu plus Cow! It was almost as though the grand old party was catching up to the BJP’s Hindutva agenda. The party kept blowing hot and cold over the Rafale deal, possibly forgetting that Rajiv Gandhi had lost an election due to a similar defence deal in 1989. The farm sector crisis also seems to have moved into the side burners.

Some political commentators are wondering whether the Congress is making an elementary mistake here. Are they hoping for a repeat of the BJP’s famous “India Shining” story of 2004 when Atal Bihari Vajpayee failed to get a second term in spite of large scale publicity over the government’s achievements?

It may be good to remember that while Vajpayee was a politician, Narendra Modi is a story-teller par excellence.

Readers may recall the words of Mark McKinnon, a well-known name in political strategy creation and execution who was behind President George W Bush’s two successful runs for American presidency. In a film titled “How To Win An Election”, he says that candidates (should) reduce the complexities of the modern world into “simple, soundbite-friendly stories”.

“Great storytelling is not about ideology. Great storytelling is about great storytelling. Voters think in very simple ways. They want things communicated in an organised, compelling and simple fashion,” He says, while pointing to the narrative arc around which such stories are built.

He recalls how the team had built President Bush’s narrative arc around global terrorism (threat), the 9/11 attack (victims), the villain (al-Qaeda), the resolution (aggressive policies against the terror outfits) and the hero (George W Bush). Prime Minister Modi has followed this narrative to the T!

Modi came to power by removing the “a” from asambhav (impossible), suggesting that change is sambhav (possible). Now the Congress is attempting to put that “a” back into sambhav apropos their hopes of unseating the BJP from power.

They are more than likely to succeed if they follow the Pied Piper of Vadnagar!

Powered by Trivone Content Services Pvt Ltd
