BJP seals pacts with bevy of Northeast parties, resurrects AGP ties

A late night announcement by BJP general secretary Ram Madhav has turned Assam's tri-cornered electoral wrestle into a two-sided one. Late Tuesday night, Madhav took to Twitter to announce that the BJP will fight the upcoming Lok Sabha elections in the state along with Asom Gana Parishad, two months after it had broken away from the alliance after the BJP came out with the Citizenship Amendment Bill. Stealing a march on its rivals, the party also "sealed" electoral alliances with a bevy of parties in the Northeast.

"After discussion, BJP and AGP have decided to work together in the coming Parliament election in Assam to defeat Congress. Announced it at Guwahati in d presence of Himanta Biswa Sarma of BJP and Atul Bora and Keshav Mahanta of AGP. BPF will be d 3rd partner in d alliance (sic)," tweeted Madhav. Assam has 14 Lok Sabha seats, while each among Arunachal Pradesh, Manipur, Meghalaya, Arunachal Pradesh and Tripura have two seats each, while Nagaland, Mizoram and Sikkim have one each.

Ram Madhav, the party's pointsman for the Northeast, held a string of meetings with regional satraps here and in Nagaland's Dimapur that went on well past Tuesday midnight before making the announcement on social media platforms.

The number of seats BJP and its partners will contest in eight NE states will be declared on March 16 in Delhi, Himanta Biswa Sarma, Assam minister and convenor of the North East Democratic Alliance (NEDA), the regional avatar of the NDA, said.

ON STRONG TURF

BJP, which had won just 7 of 25 LS seats in the eight states in the 2014 Lok Sabha polls, is in the ruling coalition in seven of them now



BJP has chief minis-ters in Assam, Arunachal, Manipur & Tripura, while its NEDA partners are in power in Meghalaya, Mizoram and Nagaland

BJP, NPP, NDPP, AGP and BPF will fight together in Assam, Nagaland, Meghalaya, Manipur & Arunachal with the mission of defeating Cong. In Tripura, BJP will fight with IPFT

Ram Madhav, BJP leader (pointsman for Northeast)
