4 DIY toners that are super easy to make and promise a flawless skin

The toner basically moisturises the skin, while getting rid of excess excess oil and stubborn dirt or makeup leftover on your face after you wash it. Facial toners are typically water-based though some reformulated toners of today go beyond that basic role. They are used to target a varying array of skin concerns—from acne to dryness to ageing.

Now, there are plethora of toners available in the market, ranging within varying price points. But since you need to tone twice a day, toners don’t have a very long shelf life. So, to save some of your time, energy and money, try one of these easy, cheap and most importantly NATURAL DIY toners.

DIY Toner for normal skin

Apple cider vinegar has malic acid in it, which makes it one of the most powerful anti-fungal ointments, which makes it amazing at keeping acne at bay. It’ll also help rebalance the skin’s pH level, and gently exfoliate the skin. Green tea is super potent too, as it’s a rich source of caffeine and is packed with skin-saving antioxidants that protect the skin.

Green tea and apple cider vinegar

Ingredients:

1/4 cup of apple cider vinegar

1 cup of green tea ( Brew two tea bags in boiling water, when cool remove the tea bags and combine with the apple cider vinegar).

DIY toner for sensitive skin

This toner is super hydrating and gentle, making it ideal for sensitive skin. Both rose water and aloe vera have anti-inflammatory qualities which reduces redness and swelling. They are also loaded with antioxidants to brighten the skin and fight free radicals that cause premature ageing.

Rose water and Aloe vera

Ingredients:

1/2 cup of rose water

1/2 cup of aloe vera

DIY toner for acne-prone skin

Tea tree is a mighty anti-inflammatory and anti-bacterial constituent, so it will ease any existing pimples and spots, simultaneously fighting acne bacteria, which will help prevent the acne from spreading. And for chamomile, it will help calm and rebalance the skin, correcting uneven skin tone.

Chamomile tea and Tea tree oil

Ingredients:

2 drops of tea tree oil

1 cup of chamomile tea (brew two tea bags in boiling water, when cool remove the tea bags and combine with the tea tree).

DIY toner for oily skin

Witch Hazel is the holy ingredient for people with oily skin, as it helps to remove any excess oil from the skin while controlling oil production. Aloe vera’s hydration property will also help absorb any oil, sebum or dirt hiding in your pores making them appear smaller, as it’s a natural astringent, while simultaneously hydrating the skin.

Aloe vera, Witch hazel and rose water

Ingredients:

1/2 cup rose water

1/2 cup of witch hazel

1/4 drops of aloe vera

Which one of these toners best suits your skin type? Comment below and let us know.

For more updates on Fashion & Beauty, follow @pinkvillafashion
