Baba Ramdev says Indians should boycott 100% of Chinese products

Baba Ramdev says Indians should boycott 100% of Chinese products | Photo Credit: BCCL

Haridwar: Yog Guru Baba Ramdev on Thursday urged people of India to boycott Chinese products as the country protects terrorists like Jaish-e-Mohammed chief Masood Azhar by standing with Pakistan at the international level.

“Now there is a big challenge in front of India to teach a lesson to China which has done protection of a monstrous terrorist like Masood Azhar by standing with Pakistan at the international level. To teach a lesson to China, the most effective weapon is to boycott Chinese products. China does around Rs 20 lakh crore business with India. It is afraid of its economic loss more than war as it understands the language of economy more. That is why I would urge the people of India to 100 per cent boycott Chinese products,” Ramdev told ANI here.

“If you will do this, then not just China, but the whole world will get to know the power of India... If we will boycott them, then China will have to think on which side it stands. The money we give to China is given to the American Army by them and from there it goes to the terrorists, who buy bullets from them and do attacks like Pulwama. The bullets bought from your money kill your jawans. We need to think about this. If we will boycott them, then China won't be able to protect Pakistan, its Army and terrorists. We need to boycott countries like China and people who support terrorists in India,” he added.

Resonating similar sentiments, Union Minister Harsimrat Kaur Badal told ANI, “China has exposed itself by the double policy that it has shown by trying to block Masood Azhar being branded as a global terrorist. I am shocked by this. China is speaking Pakistan's language. Now the time is right for 1.3 billion people of India to give a befitting reply to China by not allowing a single Chinese product at our homes. Indians should express anger by boycotting Chinese products.”

The call for boycotting Chinese goods comes after it once again blocked on Wednesday a proposal in the UN Security Council to enlist Masood Azhar as an international terrorist despite his outfit carrying out the ghastly Pulwama terror attack.

This was the fourth time when China used the technical hold to block the proposal, which is being pushed by other permanent members of the UNSC, particularly the US, Britain and France.

India expressed disappointment over the development but vowed to continue to pursue "all available avenues to ensure that terrorist leaders who are involved in heinous attacks on our citizens" are brought to justice.


