‘Paid news a cause for concern as it misleads people’

It hampers the ability of voters to form correct opinion, says official

Deputy Commissioner of Dharwad Deepa Cholan has said that paid news was a cause of concern as it misled the public and hampered their ability to form correct opinion.

She was speaking at a workshop for media persons on poll-related issues organised jointly by the district administration, the Department of Information and Public Relations and the Hubballi Tahsildar’s office here on Thursday.

Ms. Deepa said that paid news caused undue influence on voters and also affected their right to information. Considering the seriousness of the issue, the Media Certification and Monitoring Committee would keep a watch on such content in print and electronic media.

In case of instances of paid news, notice would be sent to the candidate concerned and subsequently, the expenses would be included under his election expenditure. Along with it, the issue would be reported to the Press Council of India and the National Broadcasting Authority, she said.

She said that in the wake of model code of conduct being in force, pre-certification of advertisements in support of a political party or candidate in print and electronic media and social media was mandatory. She said that it was mandatory for candidates or parties to get pre-certification for giving advertisements in print media 48 hours before polling.

Police Commissioner M.N. Nagaraj said that a total of 23 check-posts, 13 in city limits and the rest on the borders, had been set up in the district. Strict implementation of the model code of conduct was being ensured, he said.

Chairman of the District SVEEP Committee and Chief Executive Officer of Zilla Panchayat B.C. Sateesh said that voter awareness programmes were being conducted in 1,634 polling stations in Dharwad district and 238 polling stations in Shiggaon Assembly segment. Steps to increase voting percentage were being conducted in 20 polling stations that had recorded poor polling percentage in the last election, he said.

On the occasion, a handbook on the previous Lok Sabha election brought out by the Department of Information and Public Relations was released and a demonstration of the electronic voting machine and VVPAT was conducted. Additional Deputy Commissioner Suresh Itnal, Superintendent of Police G. Sangeeta, HDMC Commissioner Shakeel Ahmed, Senior Assistant Director of Information Manjunath Dollin, Tahsildar Shashidhar Madyal and others were present.
