Indians will burn all Chinese products all over India this Holi, protesting China’s support to Pakistan & Masood Azhar.

Indians will burn all Chinese products all over India this Holi, protesting China’s support to Pakistan & Masood Azhar.

RSS and Swadeshi Jagran Manch urge boycott of Chinese goods over stance on Masood Azhar. Confederation of All India Traders (CAIT) called its members to immediate boycott & bonfire Chinese goods in the country on 19th March during Holi season in 1000 places in India.

Upendra Bharti | HENB | New Delhi | March 14, 2019:: The biggest influential Hindu nationalist group RSS and its economic wing Swadeshi Jagran Manch and an Indian traders body called on Thursday for a boycott of Chinese goods after Beijing blocked a move to put a Pakistani militant leader Masood Azhar on a U.N. terrorist list following a suicide attack in J&K last month. The National Sentiment of India raised up again as China’s stance on Masood Azhar favouring the Pakistani Jihadi Terrorism for a long time. Blocking for the 4th time at the UN for ‘Ban on Masood’ as putting him in the global terrorist list by UN Security Council+, China has violated its Veto power and obviously has set an ugly example for the global fight against terrorism.

Regarded by Pakistan as its most reliable friend, China has repeatedly thwarted efforts to implement U.N. sanctions against Masood Azhar, the founder of Jaish-e-Mohammed (JeM), the group that claimed responsibility for the attack that killed 40 paramilitary police in Indian-controlled Kashmir.

The Confederation of All India Traders (CAIT), which represents 70 million traders, said it would burn Chinese goods on March 19 to “teach a lesson” to China.

“The time has come when China should suffer due to its proximity with Pakistan,” CAIT said in a statement. “The CAIT has launched a national campaign to boycott Chinese goods among the trading community of the country, calling the traders not to sell or buy Chinese goods.”

The United States, Britain and France asked the Security Council’s Islamic State and al Qaeda sanctions committee to subject the Jaish leader to an arms embargo, travel ban and asset freeze.

But China placed a “technical hold” on the proposal, saying it needed more time to consider, using the same stalling tactic it has used in the past.

Mounting impatience with Beijing’s stance was evident on social media on Thursday as #BoycottChineseProducts was the second-highest trending hashtag on Twitter in India.

Similar campaigns in the past have proved ineffectual.

China is India’s second biggest trading partner. Chinese products – from mobile phones made by companies such as Xiaomi Inc to toys – are ubiquitous in India and trade between the countries grew to nearly $90 billion in the year ending March 2018.

“India – China bilateral trade in 2017 – $84.44 billion. India’s exports to China – $16.34 billion. India’s imports from China – $68.10 billion. Trade deficit – $51.75 Now it is time to #BoycottChineseProducts to Protest Beijing block on UN action on terror. #BoycottChina”, says a nationalist in his twitter handle.

Ashwani Mahajan, National Co- convenor of Swadeshi Jagran Manch, the economic wing of the Rashtriya Swayamsevak Sangh, a Hindu nationalist group with close ties to the ruling Bharatiya Janata Party (BJP), also called for a boycott of Chinese goods.

He also wrote to Prime Minister Narendra Modi recommending that India hit Beijing with higher tariffs.

“Government of India needs to take immediate action to raise tariff duties on all Chinese imports,” Mahajan said in the letter, seen by Reuters.

“China, which is already under economic stress, thanks to trade war initiated by U.S. and other trade partners of China, will definitely realise the implications of the unjust action of protecting terrorists.”

India’s trade ministry said in an email the country can’t take any unilateral punitive action against a fellow member of the World Trade Organization.

A senior government official, who refused to be named as he was not authorised to speak to media, said there has been a move to “restrict” Chinese imports but that India was not in a position to replace products such as electronics.

Finance Minister Arun Jaitley warned against any hasty reaction.

“It’s a diplomatic issue, and India will take a decision after a careful thought,” Jaitley told CNN-News18. “We’re not a small player on the global stage, but foreign policy issues are tackled in a measured way, not in a knee-jerk manner.”

With just weeks to go before a general election, India’s main opposition Congress party said Modi’s attempts to improve ties with China were not yielding results.

“Weak Modi is scared of Xi. Not a word comes out of his mouth when China acts against India,” Congress President Rahul Gandhi said on Twitter, referring to Chinese President Xi Jinping.

China’s foreign ministry did not immediately respond to a faxed message seeking comment on the boycott calls.

“We are launching a national campaign asking traders not to buy or sell any Chinese products, especially ahead of the festival of Holi,” CAIT national secretary general Praveen Khandelwal.

The traders’ body has asked its members to burn Chinese products on March 19 to mark their protest and has also urged the government to levy high customs duty on all Chinese imports.

China should suffer for shielding Pakistan’s anti-India activities,” said Khandelwal.

Yogguru Swami Ramdev also gave his clarion call to #BoycottChineseProducts condemning China’s stand to support Masood Azhar and Pakistani Terrorism.

Prominent Hindu interlocutor and Hindu Existence Website Editor, Upananda Brahmachari welcomed the decision of RSS and Swadeshi Jagran Manch to boycott Chinese goods. He also appealed Hindu Janajagruti Samiti, Sri Ram Yuva Sena, Hindu Rashtra Sena, Hindu Samhati and many other Hindu organisations to take the responsibility to break down the spine of Chines business in India.

Taking his twitter handle Brahmachari urged the world leaders to change the Veto Policy in United National Security Council as, “The UNSC @ UNSC_Reports must think over the misuse of Veto Power. China have been using its Veto to rescue a Pak based Jihadi Terrorist Masood Azhar consecutively. This is misuse of Veto power. VETO IN @ UNSC_Reports must be vetted by another member with vet power inUNSC. Otherwise it will be misused by like China”

In another tweet, Brahmachari urged Govt of India to impose 200% tax on all Chinese goods as it was levied on Pakistani imports after Pulwama attack.

China on Wednesday vetoed India’s fourth attempt at the UN to declare Masood Azhar a global terrorist. India’s attempts to impose sanctions against the Pakistan-based terrorist came after a suicide attack orchestrated by the JeM in Kashmir’s Pulwama district killed 40 Central Reserve Police Force (CRPF) personnel.

In this Holi, Indians will burn China in India.

…

__inputs from Reuters, The Hindu and TNN.
