Be cautious while posting comments on social media

Monitoring panels to keep an eye on TV channels and websites

Contesting candidates and the general public have been asked to be cautious while posting comments on social media sites during elections. Those who post objectionable postings will face the consequences.

For the first time, the election authorities have constituted Social Media Monitoring Committees to track television channels and social media sites during the Assembly and Parliament elections. An officer of the rank of Assistant Commissioner of Police (ACP) in the police commissionerates and Deputy Superintendents of Police (DSPs) in districts will head the committees.

Besides, a circle inspector of cyber crime cell will track the television scrolls and the comments posted by aspirants, party activists and the general public from time to time.

“The ACP/DSPs, CIs and their staff will monitor TV channels and the social media websites round the clock, and spot if there are any objectionable comments and statements in violation of the Model Code of Conduct (MCC). The cyber cell police will book cases against them,” said Additional Director- General of Police (law and order) A. Ravishankar.

A couple of cases have been booked in the State by cyber cell police on violation of the MCC, according to him.

“As social media became a platform for many people, we decided to keep a vigil on the sites. The committees have been formed as per the directions of the Election Commission of India,” Vijayawada Police Commissioner Ch. Dwaraka Tirumala Rao said.

The police cautioned the youth, particularly the students, who were active on social media sites. They appealed to the youth to be cautious while responding to the comments of their friends and followers and advised them not to land in trouble.

“Earlier we registered cases for posting insulting comments on social media sites. Now, persons who post damaging, insulting and objectionable comments or photographs against any person, party or disrespecting/damaging the sentiments of a group or organisation will be booked under IT Act, other IPC Sections and also under violation of MCC,” a cyber cell officer said.
