Mumbai CSMT Bridge collapse: 6 dead over 30 injured; here's all you need to know

CSMT

bridge

BMC

bridge collapse

south Mumbai

Five people dead as FOB outside CSMT collapses 00:11

Deeply anguished by the loss of lives due to the foot overbridge accident in Mumbai. My thoughts are with the berea… https://t.co/sUN4rpSPoi — Narendra Modi (@narendramodi) 1552579792000

Pained to hear about the FOB incident near TOI building in Mumbai. Spoke to BMC Commissioner and @MumbaiPolice offi… https://t.co/dOAu3jOuUW — Devendra Fadnavis (@Dev_Fadnavis) 1552577796000

Arvind Sawant visits injured in the hospital

Situation outside St.George hospital. ANI Photo

#CSMTBridgeCollapse kills 2. More details awaited. @MumbaiPolice @DisasterMgmtBMC @RoadsOfMumbai @RidlrMUM https://t.co/8olcNvNTzd — Mumbai Mirror (@MumbaiMirror) 1552575690000

Part of a bridge collapsed outside CSMT.

Situation at the bridge collapse site.

Public foot over bridge near CSMT collapses 00:29

At least six people were killed and 36 persons injured after a major portion of a foot overbridge outside Chhatrapati Shivaji Maharaj Terminus () collapsed on Thursday evening.Theis also known as Kasab bridge, as the 26/11 terrorist had walked from CSMT towards Times of India building on that bridge.The bridge connected the bustling Chhatrapati Shivaji Maharaj Terminus railway station with the Azad Maidan Police Station.The incident - the third footbridge collapse in the city in the last 18 months - occurred around 7.35 pm as the bridge was reportedly overloaded with commuters hurrying to their homes, theDisaster Control said.The bridge was nearly 500 meters away from Brihanmumbai Municipal Corporation (BMC) office. Other key offices locating in the vicinity are — The Times of India Building, Mumbai Police Headquarters, CAMA Hospital.Officials claimed that the bridge was found to be sturdy after a recent structural audit and only needed a few minor repairs.The injured people have been admitted to St. George hospital and Gokuldas Tejpal (GT) Hospital.Politicians from several parties including the Bharatiya Janata Party, the Shiv Sena, the Congress, the Nationalist Congress Party and others rushed to the site and activists helped in the rescue operations.After the two previous tragedies, the BMC, the Railways and other agencies had carried out a survey of all new and old railway bridges, flyovers, and foot over bridges, to ascertain any dangers and take preventive measures.On account of the falling debris, peak hour traffic towards Byculla and Dadar and beyond was diverted, creating massive snarls across. Rail traffic remained unaffected.Read this story in Marathi Read this story in Bengali #CSMTBridgeCollapse: More people feared trapped, rescue operation underway. Follow LIVE updates:… https://t.co/L45GVjyyRw— Mumbai Mirror (@MumbaiMirror) 1552576054000 Death toll rises to sixMumbai Police to register a case in the incident where a portion of a foot over bridge near CSMT railway station collapsed earlier this evening.An eyewitness said when the bridge collapsed, there was a red light at the nearby signal, and that is why the death toll was not more.An eyewitness said when the bridge collapsed, there was a red light at the nearby signal, and that is why the death toll was not more.— We have received 2 bodies, both of them were nurses at this hospital. Body of one more nurse is at St George Hospital. 14 injured have been admitted here, 1 of them has been shifted to JJ Hospital for a neurosurgery: Dr Mukund Tayade, GT hospital Medical SuperintendentSpeaking to media,Maharashtra Chief Minister Devendra Fadnavis said the incident is unfortunate. "I have ordered for a high level inquiry. Even after structural audit if such incident happened, it raises question on the audit. Inquiry will be done. Strictest action will be taken."Fadnavis also announces Rs 5 lakh ex-gratia to the kin of deceased and Rs 50,000 to those injured. The government will also bear medical expenses of the injured, he said.— Commuters are advised to use the Mahapalika Marg from CST to Metro Junction and ahead towards Princess Street Flyover/ Crawford Market/ Chakala and Mohammed Ali Road.— Commuters coming from JJ Flyover may take a right turn towards Crawford Market/ Metro Junction/ CST and ahead or take a left turn at Nesbit junction and move further to PD mellow road/Avatar Singh bedi chowk to CST/ lion Gate, Regal junction and further.— Thorough inquiry will be conducted and those who are responsible will not be spared, says Subhash Desai. The minister says #railways is responsible for the incident. #Mumbai #CSMT #MumbaiBridgeCollapse— "At least five people have been killed and 29 others injured," said BMC PRO. The deceased have been identified as Apoorva Prabhu (35), Ranjana Tambe(40), Zahid Shiraj Khan (32)— The BMC had ordered a structural audit of the bridge which stated that only minor repairs were needed. The accountability should be fixed. Those who carried out the audit should be booked under(302). The government has to take action against the officers. The citizens of Mumbai will not tolerate such negligence.The bridge wasn't in a bad condition, it required minor repairs for which work was underway. It will be probed why the bridge was not closed until the work was completed. The investigation into the incident will be carried out by the #BMC and #Railways. Maharashtra government will take care of medical treatment of those injured: Vinod Tawde.In an unfortunate incident a portion of a foot over bridge (FOB) over road outside CSMT station collapsed. It is a public fob and not railway fob , maintained by BMC , Railway traffic not affected, said, Central Railways Divisonal Railway Manager DK Sharma.An NDRF team has been moved from Andheri center. As per initial information 10-12 persons are feared to be trapped under the debris.Thought the bridge was constructed by Railways, it was being maintained by the BMC.Traffic has been diverted from CST and JJ flyover, and the area has been decongestant. The situation has been under control.Situation outside the bridge collapse site23 people injured in the incident.The bridge was repaired just two-three years ago.Injured are being shifted to nearby CAMA hospital.Foot over bridge connecting CST platform 1 North end with B T Lane near Times of India building has collapsed. Injured persons are being shifted to hospitals. Traffic affected. Commuters to use alternate routes. Senior officers are on spot.
