Pollachi sexual abuse case: 'How can AIADMK govt, ruling in name of Amma, remain silent,' asks Kamal Haasan

Makkal Needhi Maiam chief Kamal Haasan | Photo Credit: Twitter

Chennai: Amid the raging political storm over the Pollachi sexual abuse case where a number of young women were assaulted and blackmailed, actor-turned-political and chief of Makkal Needhi Maiam Kamal Haasan on Friday hit out at the ruling AIAIDMK over its alleged silence in the case and posed a number of questions to Chief Minister Edappadi K. Palaniswami.

Questioning the state government Haasan asked, "How have the videos of the victims been leaked when the police said that the accused deleted them." After the case came to light, at least 6 videos of different victims have surfaced. According to reports, the number of victims could be anywhere between 50 to 200 women.

"How will you assure all those women who are scared that their video will be released, if they file a complaint? Why and what are you waiting for? Are you waiting for the elections to be over?" Haasan can be heard saying in a video posted on his Twitter.

Continuing his attack against CM Palamiswami, Haasan asked the government to reveal what steps have been taken to "help the survivors and ensure women's safety in the state. "

“The ministers keep the photo of Amma in their pockets but also threaten the students who are staging protests against this heinous crime," he said. The students of Madurai government medical college had on Thursday protested against the Pollachi sexual assault case and demanded a special tribunal consisting of a female judge for crimes against women.

In the Pollachi abuse case, a gang of four men lured young women to isolated places and molested them. The gang is said to have been active since 2013, and in many cases, these men reportedly shot explicit videos of the women and used them to blackmail the victims for more sexual favours. The four men identified as N Satish, N Sabarirajan, T Vasanthakumar and K Thirunavukkarasu have been arrested.

The case came to light after one of the victims filed a complaint against the accused and the police recovered videos of other women from their phones.


