Lok Sabha polls 2019: BJP state President Dilip Ghosh's comments spark controversy, questions TMC candidates Mimi Chakraborty and Nusrat Jahan's 'filmy character'

Mimi Chakraborty

Nusrat Jahan

Mamata Banerjee

Somnath Chatterjee

Hema Malini

Roopa Ganguly

Narendra Modi

Social media is abuzz with memes, jokes and comments about actressesand, following their nominations for Lok Sabha seats by Trinamool Congress. And a controversy sparked over BJP state President Dilip Ghosh’s comments about the two actresses on Friday.Asked about comments and trolls, which have flooded social media, Dilip Ghosh said, “Jo jish category ka hay, character ke hay, uske bare me charcha hoga. (Those who belong to what category and have what kind of character, they will draw comments and discussions).”However, Ghosh immediately corrected himself by saying he was mentioning about the duo’s “filmy character.”When mentioned by media persons that these two actresses have freedom of expression and right to fight polls in a democratic country, Ghosh, questioning the choice of candidates, said “Trinamool Congress could not field any better candidate in Jadavpur or Barasat that they have put actresses Nusrat and Mimi in the poll fray!”Even netizens questioned decision of Trinamool Supremoto field political greenhorns like Chakraborty from famous Jadavpur seat and termed it a "disgrace". This seat was fought by various political heavyweights like former Chief Minister Buddhadeb Bhattacharjee and ex-Lok Sabha speaker Somnath Chatterjee. Social media also has clear mention of this. The Jadavpur seat was also significant for Chief Minister Mamata Banerjee, who had defeated CPI-M heavyweight latefor this seat for the first time.When asked about BJP’s track record of fielding actresses like Hema Malini, Ghosh clarified that BJP always give candidature to senior actresses likeorfrom Bengal, who is a national award winner. “We have sent Roopa Ganguly to Rajya Sabha. She has a chequered career in the film industry. Mimi and Nusrat are political greenhorns,” Ghosh quipped.“Just imagine, Mimi has replaced Sugato Bose. This seat was once fought by Somnath Chatterjee, Indrajit Gupta and even Sujan Chakrabarty. And TMC has now fielded Mimi Chakrbarty,” Ghosh rues. CPI-M fielded senior advocate and former Kolkata Mayor Bikash Ranjan Bhattacharya in Jadavpur seat. BJP is yet to announce its candidate list.Memes and jokes, even comments, both gross and smart ones, flooded Twitter, Facebook and WhatsApp groups. The two actresses were also trolled by some netizens who even went ahead to post memes of the revealing costumes worn by them. On the day of her first campaign in Basirhat, Nusrat said on Thursday, “I like to echo my leader Mamata Banerjee’s words. We need to be cultured and stop making such derogatory comments.”“I think Mamata Banerjee has lost her self-confidence. Not only people were startled by their candidature, it was a startling revelation to the Trinamool Congress workers also,” Ghosh commented.Questioning about the duo’s contribution in Parliamentary democracy in future, Ghosh said, “Even if they win, will they be able to give time for Parliament!”Asked whether Prime Ministerwill fight from Kolkata, Ghosh said, “If Modi fights from Bengal, we will work hard to make him victorious.”
