Wildlife STF nabs Kolkata man in Sagar for turtle poaching

Bhopal: A Kolkata resident was arrested from outside the district count premises in Sagar district by the Special task force (STF) of Madhya Pradesh state forest department’s wildlife wing for his alleged role in overseas smuggling of endangered turtles. Accused identified as Tapas Basak alias Rony has been arrested in the past too for wildlife poaching.MPSTF had arrested him earlier in August 2018 from Kolkata after which he secured bail. Court had asked him to turn up before the MP STF within stipulated time, but he allegedly jumped the bail. His bail plea was rejected by high court and Supreme Court that have asked him to surrender.“Two days ago, when he was in Sagar for bail, he was arrested from outside the premises of district court,” said an STF officer citing that his arrest was very necessary.Rony is a resident of Jadavpur, who was earlier arrested by the Bengal forest department for allegedly smuggling turtles to Bangladesh. He was also arrested by the Wildlife Crime Control Bureau (WCCB) earlier for a similar offence. MPSTF (wildlife) officials say Basak had been smuggling these species to China and the Southeast Asian countries, where people pay handsome money for turtles as pet. “There are four cases against him including three in Kolkata” said an officer.His name had cropped up during interrogation of Manivannan Murugesan who is currently in custody of STF wildlife unit for smuggling endangered turtles. His bail plea was also rejected by supreme court recently. Murugesan was arrested by the MPSTF wildlife from Chennai on January 31 and he has been in Sagar jail for smuggling endangered red crown roofed turtles from Morena.MPSTF have approached enforcement directorate (ED) to initiate money laundering case against Murugesan and four others, identified as Ajay Singh who was arrested from Agra, Mohammad Irfan from Kolkata, Sameem Ansari from Kolkata. Interpol had organised a coordination meeting with the MPSTF and officers from Thailand and Dhaka during an investigating supportive meeting against illegal turtle poaching . The meet was held in July 2018. Murugesan is also wanted by Thailand police. He is a native of Singapore and his alleged illegal trade is spread across Thailand, Malaysia, Macau, Hong Kong, China and Madagascar. Interpol was looking for Murugesan for a long period.
