The inside story of IAF's Balakot strike

In the small hours of February 26, Prime Minister Narendra Modi was surfing the social media, not quite a part of his usual routine. He was trying to see if there was any reaction to an ongoing mission - air strike on a JeM camp in Balakot - particularly from Pakistan.

Indian agencies had pictures of the trail that led to the camp from Balakot, with one billboard giving details of the camp and another asking for recruits to sign up.

A double-storeyed building with three rooms on each floor was occupied by three hard-core terrorist trainers - Maulana Qudratullah, Maulana Junaid and Maulana Qasim of Lahore. Qudratullah is regarded as a special mentor, while Qasim imparted martial arts skills to the new recruits.

MODI STAYS UP

It would be the first time that India was conducting an air strike in mainland Pakistan since 1971. PM Modi, though, appeared as collected as ever when he returned to his official residence - 7, Lok Kalyan Marg - at 9.30 pm after a speaking engagement. His staff found it strange that the Prime Minister did not go to bed at midnight as usual. Instead, he kept working on files in his study while monitoring the progress of the air strikes on a JeM camp in Balakot.

Around 3 am, the Prime Minister was informed that a fleet of Indian Air Force (IAF) fighter jets had taken off and was shortly expected to cross into Pakistani territory. Half an hour later, he was told the jets had hit their target in Pakistan and flown safely back to their respective bases.

THE CAMP

Balakot was chosen over two other targets because it was in mainland Pakistan and would also not involve army or civilian casualties. After the air strike by India, Pakistan claimed that the camp had been abandoned by the Jaish years ago. Yet there was nothing barren about the Balakot camp when the IAF struck it early on the morning of February 26.

The India Today Magazine story shows clearly that it had ten buildings that housed close to 300 people - both top terrorists and trainers. The Markaz Syed Ahmad Shaheed, as the camp is known, was set up in 2004-05 and is on the crest of a ridge called Jaba Top. It had been under the scrutiny of Indian intelligence agencies over the years, allowing them to build up strong 'hum-int' (human intelligence). Spread over six acres, the camp had 10 major buildings or complexes devoted to various kinds of activities. The main complex was a large U-shaped structure with a big hall and eight rooms located on the ground floor with a dormitorytype residence on the other floors. Indian agencies had information on who was staying in each room when the strike took place. A little distance away was the mosque complex.

Indian agencies had pictures of the mosque with its walls lined with portraits of "shaheeds" or militants who had died fighting in Kashmir. Billboard advertisements in Balakot town called for recruits for a fresh course that was to begin on February 25 - a fact which further establishes that there would be an estimated 300 people in the camp after that date.

THE PLAN

The plan was simple but brilliant. The strikes would be carried out by a dozen Mirage 2000 aircraft equipped with Israelibuilt SPICE (Smart Precise Impact and Cost Effective) 2000 bombs that could hit with pinpoint precision. The Mirages were reportedly accompanied by four Sukhoi-30s to provide air cover. Two surveillance aircraft, the Israeli Phalcon Airborne Warning and Control System (AWACS) and the indigenous Netra Airborne Early Warning and Control (AEW&C) system, were deployed as were two IL-76s for mid-air refuelling.

THE STRIKE

Five bombs struck the targets, three hitting the large complex housing 150 recruits, one the main U-shaped complex that had most of the leadership and the fifth the building that had the master trainers. One target they could not strike was the abandoned school where Yusuf Azhar resided. That's because the aircraft chosen to strike it was unable to lock onto the target to release the bomb.

THE IMPACT

There were two ways the air force could validate that they had hit the targets. An airborne platform carrying a Synthetic Aperture Radar, which can take images of the target at night or even if it is cloudy, sent back pictures both before and after the strike, validating the IAF's claim.

India Today was shown one of the high-resolution satellite pictures in the IAF's possession which clearly showed three holes punctured into the roof of one of the buildings - a classic signature of a SPICE bomb strike.

According to Indian intelligence, monitored conversations in the area indicated that hours after the strike, the local police station recorded three ambulances with 35 bodies in them coming from the camps. And another 37 ambulances had been rushed to the spot. However, the India Today Magazine report does not hazard a guess into the number of Jaish members killed in the strike - leaving that for competent authorities to assess.
