US, UK, France planning 'open debate' in UNSC on Masood Azhar's listing as global terrorist

Jaish-e-Mohammed's chief Masood Azhar | Photo Credit: ANI

New Delhi The US, France and UK might move a resolution seeking a vote on the designating Pakistan-based terrorist organisation Jaish-e-Mohammed chief Masood Azhar as a global terrorist. Notably, the vote will be preceded by an open debate on the issue where China can be directly asked about its opposition on Azhar's listing. According to reports, currently, the three permanent members are believed to be in intense "good faith" discussions with China to arrive at a "compromise" in the issue.

The developments have come after China, last week, blocked for the fourth time a resolution at the United Nations Security Council Committee, of which India is a member, on listing Azhar as a global terrorist. Interestingly, even at that time, the proposal was moved by the US, France and the UK.

With the Chinese simply putting a 'technical hold' every time on the resolution and with the internal consultations of the UN committee being private, the move to bring a resolution for a vote in the most powerful wing of the UN with an open debate might prove to be the key for India bring the mastermind of the dastardly Pulwama attack to the books.

Earlier, in an unusually strong warning to the Chinese, a UN Security Council diplomat had said that other members are being forced to pursue other actions at the Security Council. "It shouldn't have to come to that," he told PTI.

Reports suggest that as of now the three permanent members are working on a 'compromise', that is some changes that China is believed to have suggested to the language of the terrorist designation. However, unlike the past, the US, UK and France are not willing to wait and will go for the open debate if they feel that China is not doing a good faith negotiation on the "compromise formula".

US, UK, France planning open debate in UNSC on Masood Azhar's listing as global terrorist
