Opposition without agenda, Cong firmly in saddle: Capt

editorial@tribune.com

Tribune News Service

Chandigarh, March 16

Claiming that his government has laid a strong foundation for the development of Punjab in just two years, Chief Minister Capt Amarinder Singh today said the Congress regime had delivered on each of the “nine nuktas” promised in the run-up to the Assembly elections.

Speaking at a press conference to mark the two years of his government, the Chief Minister said the Opposition had no constructive agenda. “In fact, the Congress has no opposition in the state because of the large-scale development done by it. Even SAD president Sukhbir Badal’s attempts to woo deras ahead of the polls won’t help his party,” he said.

Asked about the conflict of interest and lokpal bills, as promised by his government, Capt Amarinder said the draft was ready and the law would cover everyone, including the CM. The Bills would be placed before the House in the next session. Only four legislations that his government had promised were pending and would be implemented soon, he said. The policy on sand mining was sub judice and had to be put in abeyance for the time being, he added.

He rejected the charge of babus ruling the state as “absolutely incorrect” and said the elected representatives had full say in the state’s affairs.

Taking on the NDA government, the Chief Minister said the Narendra Modi-led Union government was using the defence forces for political gains in the coming Lok Sabha elections.

Pointing out that even late Prime Minister Indira Gandhi did not use the previous wars with Pakistan for political gains. The Congress never politicised the 1965 or the 1971 war, he said, adding, “We have always put the nation above political interests.”

He said any government of the day, including the Congress, would have retaliated after the Pulwama attack. “The government just did its job, which the Congress governments had done in the past too,” he said, adding that the Modi government had simply coined a new phrase – surgical strikes – for such action. It was earlier called border raids.

On the dialogue with Pakistan regarding Kartarpur corridor, Capt Amarinder said he did not trust Pakistan’s intent behind opening the corridor, as their agenda was nefarious and political, and aimed at exploiting the sentiments of the Sikhs. Underlining the need to keep a close watch on the developments, the Chief Minister said while he was all for the corridor, there was a need to exercise caution.

“India’s agenda is religious, but theirs is totally disruptive,” he said, citing “Referendum 2020” as an example of ISI’s attempts to exploit Sikh sentiments to divide and destabilise Punjab. He said the government would waive more farm loans after the state's fiscal situation improved further. He said if funds were available, he would give benefit to more farmers.

‘NDA politicising forces’

Taking on the NDA government, the CM said the Narendra Modi-led Union government was using the defence forces for political gains. He pointed out that even late Prime Minister Indira Gandhi did not use the previous wars with Pakistan for political gains. The Congress never politicised the 1965 or the 1971 war, he said, adding, “We have always put the nation above political interests.”

‘Never approached ex-PM’

The CM said neither he nor any other party leader had approached former Prime Minister Dr Manmohan Singh with a proposal to field him from Amritsar. They had only gone to brief him about the party affairs in the state, he added, adding that the former Prime Minister had already decided not to contest the polls due to health reasons. On move to field Navjot Sidhu from Amritsar, he said, “It is up to him, if he wants to fight.”
