J&K: Ex-IAS officer Shah Faesal launches political party, says he admires Imran Khan, Kejriwal

The 2010 IAS batch topper resigned from the Indian Administrative Service (IAS) in January this year to protest unabated killings in Kashmir and marginalisation of Indian Muslims. (Photo: Rouf A Roshangar)

Former IAS officer Shah Faesal today launched his political party 'Jammu and Kashmir People's Movement' at a function in Rajbagh area of Srinagar. The political rally saw participation from hundreds of people.

The 2010 IAS batch topper resigned from the Indian Administrative Service (IAS) in January this year to protest unabated killings in Kashmir and marginalisation of Indian Muslims.

Faesal blamed the central government for subverting public institutions like the Reserve Bank of India (RBI), Central Bureau of Investigation (CBI) and the National Investigation Agency (NIA).

While addressing the gathering, Shah Faesal said, "I welcome the people of Jammu and Kashmir who have came here to attend this rally. At first, I thought I will join any prominent political party of Kashmir valley, but their reaction towards me was very negative. So, I decided to launch my own political party which will be a new platform for Kashmir valley's youth."

Faesal said that he admires Pakistan's Prime Minister Imran Khan and Delhi Chief Minister Arvind Kejriwal for their political struggle.

"Our party will work for the peaceful resolution of Kashmir as per the wishes of the people living here. We will fight with forces intent to divide Jammu and Kashmir on the basis of religion. We will represent Kashmir's youth. We will work for the health sector will finish corruption from the state," Shah Faesal said.

Without giving any names, Faesal said, "Those who were ready to accommodate me in their political parties, by denying them and their offers, they are now saying, I am an agent of RSS and BJP."

Shah Faesal said, "Our intention to launch this party is to provide a platform for people from all religions and castes."

Faesal also said that Kashmiri pandits were also part of the Kashmiri culture and that they should return to the valley.

Shah Faesal's political rally saw participation from people across the Kashmir valley. Delegations from Leh and Jammu division were also seen at the rally.

Shah Faesal is a native of Sogam-Lolab area of Kupwara district in north Kashmir. He had also launched a crowdfunding campaign in January to support his initiative.

Several youngsters and aspiring politicians joined Faesal's political party, among them is 31-year-old former Jawaharlal National University (JNU) student leader Shehla Rashid Shora.

Shehla Rashid also addressed the rally and said,"We need basic living facilities and we need development. We will work fo the peaceful resolution of Kashmir issue."

Shehla also requested the women to come forward and join the newly formed political party.

Shehla Rashid has been an active critic of PM Narendra Modi-led Bharatiya Janata Party (BJP) government, but there is no clarity on whether the party will field her as a candidate in the Lok Sabha elections or not.
