Goa CM Manohar Parrikar loses battle against pancreatic ailment, dies at the age 63

Manohar Parrikar who was born on 13 December 1955 in Goa, had been reportedly battling with cancer for the past few months | Photo Credit: PTI

New Delhi: The untimely demise of Manohar Gopalkrishna Prabhu Parrikar, an established face of BJP leadership not only in his home state-Goa but also in the national politics is undoubtedly a major setback for his party. The death of the Goa CM has sent shock waves within the party which is still trying to come to terms with the death of its ‘towering leader’ and mentor, Bharat Ratna Atal Bihari Vajpayee.

Manohar Parrikar who was born on 13 December 1955 in Goa, had been battling with the pancreatic ailment for the past few months. The ailing Goa CM, who was being treated for advanced pancreatic ailment, was admitted to a private hospital in North Goa. His wife Medha lost the battle against cancer in 2000.

Being an RSS Swayamsevak in his initial days and becoming the chief instructor for the organisation when he was in the final years of his college, his active political career kicked off in 1994 when he became the Member of Legislative Assembly in Goa House.

Soon his political and administrative acumen imbued with his adherence to the party’s core ideology led him to climb the organisational ladder making him the opposition leader in the Goa Assembly from June-November 1999. Later, Parrikar went on to take the post of Chief Minister of Goa from October 24, 2000, till February 27, 2002.

However, he was again elected as the CM in June 2002 but this time his tenure was shortlived as four of the BJP MLA’s resigned from the house. He was once again sworn in as Goa CM in March 2012 but again had to resign from the post in November 2014 as Prime Minister Narendra Modi entrusted him with the responsibility of Defence Minister of the country.

Parrikar had to again swear-in as the CM of Goa in March 2017 once the governor of the state called him to form the government in Goa. His two-and-a-half years stint as the Defence Minister of India will be remembered forever for he gave a free hand to the Army to deal pro-actively with cross-border terrorism. He will forever be remembered for the ‘surgical strike’ done in September 2016, approved by the Prime Minister, against Pakistan-based terror groups in PoK by the Indian elite special forces. The strikes took place to avenge the martyrdom of 19 soldiers, who were killed in Uri by these very terror groups.

Last but not the least, Parrikar's management skills and administrative experience brought the gigantic task of ‘military modernisation’ back on track after the long period of “critical hollowness” affecting the defence preparedness of India.

Finally, it goes without saying that the tragic death of a veteran leader like Manohar Parrikar is not only a loss to his parent party-BJP but to the entire nation keeping in mind the impending leadership crisis in the country.
