Masood Azhar issue will be resolved, says China envoy

China was the only country that did not back the proposal, much to India’s “disappointment”.

New Delhi: In words that would be encouraging for India, Chinese ambassador Luo Zhaohui on Sunday expressed confidence that the issue regarding the proposal for listing at the UN Security Council (UNSC) of (Pakistan-based JeM chief) Masood Azhar as a global terrorist would be “resolved”, adding that China had “only” placed a technical hold and that there would be further consultations.

It may be recalled that China had last week placed a technical hold on the proposal at the UNSC that had been moved by France, the United States and Britain. It may also be recalled that the proposal was backed by 14 out of 15 UN Security Council members. China was the only country that did not back the proposal, much to India’s “disappointment”.

“Regarding the Masood (Azhar) case, we fully understand and believe this matter, the concern from your side, we understand that, we are optimistic and quite sure this matter will be resolved. This is only a technical hold and that means there is time for continued consultations. It will be resolved, believe me,” the ambassador said at an event at the Chinese embassy here to celebrate Holi.

The envoy added after the Wuhan summit (between Chinese President Xi Jinping and Prime Minister Narendra Modi last year), Sino-Indian cooperation was on the “fast track” and the Chinese side was “fully satisfied” with this progress. His remark on the Azhar issue that “it was only a technical hold” placed by his country is being seen as significant and could be viewed with some hope by India.

Despite being disappointed over China’s persistent blocking of UN Security Council resolutions to designate Pakistan-based terrorist Masood Azhar as a global terrorist, government sources said on Saturday that India would “show patience” and be prepared for the long haul. Without elaborating, government sources had also said there are issues that China needs to resolve with Pakistan and India was not looking for any deal with China to get Azhar banned by the UN.

The sources further said India will interact directly with China on this matter in future and New Delhi does not require any other country to intercede with Beijing on its behalf. Government sources also said India would not rest till the UN takes action against Azhar, adding that for China itself, terrorism was a major challenge and that there were terror groups in Pakistan that target even China.

Observers feel India does not want to sour ties with its larger eastern neighbour and doesn’t want to wash away the recent post-Doklam gains in Sino-Indian relations. This was probably the reason why India’s official reaction to China’s recent move merely expressed “disappointment” without naming Beijing. Observers noticed that the statement was relatively mildly-worded and did not lash out at China. Also, the second edition of the informal summit between the Chinese President and the Prime Minister is due to take place later this year in India. Chinese President Xi Jinping is scheduled to visit India later this year for the summit and New Delhi is apparently keen that this not be derailed.

Observers also note China does not want to spoil its relations with all-weather friend Pakistan and Islamic hardline outfits in that country as the Chinese are protecting their huge financial nvestments in the China-Pakistan Economic Corridor.
