Faesal launches political party, Shehla Rashid joins

Faesal launches political party, Shehla Rashid joins

SRINAGAR, Mar 17: Former IAS officer Shah Faesal today launched his political party-Jammu and Kashmir People's Movement- here today.

Former students' leader Shehla Rashid joined the party. Large number of people attended the launching function, which was held at Gindan Park at Raj Bagh here amid tight security.

The 2010 IAS batch topper resigned from the Indian administrative service (IAS) in January this year to “protest unabated killings in Kashmir and marginalisation of Indian Muslims”.

Faesal blamed the central government for subverting public institutions like the Reserve Bank of India (RBI), Central Bureau of Investigation (CBI) and the National Investigation Agency (NIA).

While addressing the gathering, Shah Faesal said, "I welcome the people of Jammu and Kashmir who have come here to attend this rally. At first, I thought I will join any prominent political party of Kashmir valley. But when I tried to get feedback from youth about it, they opposed it. The youth said that I should not join those who are involved in the killing of innocent people here and their exploitation. So, I decided to launch my own political party which will be a new platform for Kashmir valley's youth."

Faesal said that he admires Pakistan's prime minister Imran Khan and Delhi chief minister Arvind Kejriwal for their political struggle.

"Our party will work for the peaceful resolution of Kashmir as per the wishes of the people living here. We will fight with forces intent to divide Jammu and Kashmir on the basis of religion. We will represent Kashmir's youth. We will work for the health sector and will finish corruption from the state," Shah Faesal said.

Without giving any names, Faesal said, "Those who were ready to accommodate me in their political parties, by denying them and their offers, they are now saying, I am an agent of RSS and BJP."

Shah Faesal said, "Our intention to launch this party is to provide a platform for people from all religions and castes."

Faesal also said Kashmiri pandits were also part of the Kashmiri culture and that they should return to the valley.

Shah Faesal's political rally saw participation from people across the Kashmir valley. Delegations from Leh and Jammu division were also seen at the rally.

Shah Faesal is a native of Sogam-Lolab area of Kupwara district in north Kashmir. He had also launched a crowdfunding campaign in January to support his initiative.

Several youngsters and aspiring politicians joined Faesal's political party. Among them is 31-year-old former Jawaharlal National University (JNU) student leader Shehla Rashid Shora.

Shehla Rashid also addressed the rally and said, "We need basic living facilities and we need development. We will work for the peaceful resolution of Kashmir issue."

Shehla also requested the women to come forward and join the newly formed political party.

The party released a vision document before its launch.

The vision document said that the party will pursue a “peaceful resolution of the Kashmir problem as per the will and aspirations of the people of Jammu and Kashmir”. The manifesto said that the party will attempt to bring about “sustainable peace” in the state by “making the people politically empowered, economically prosperous, socially emancipated, ethically evolved, culturally enlightened and environmentally conscious”.

The party said it will seek to protect the special status granted to the state under the Indian Constitution. It added that it will seek “adequate political representation for under-represented communities like Buddhists, Sikhs, Christians and Kashmiri Pandits”.
