Sissu, Koksar villagers threaten to boycott poll

editorial@tribune.com

Kuldeep Chauhan

Tribune News Service

Shimla, March 17

Tribals of two gram panchayats, Sissu and Koksar, in the Lahaul valley have threatened to boycott the May 19 Lok Sabha elections, saying that the state and Central governments have failed to ensure communication, road and air connectivity and electricity even after a month this winter in the wake of heavy snow.

According to Sissu panchayat pradhan Suman Kumari and vice-pradhan Manoj Kumar, villagers sat on a dharna on the premises of the police post today as all representations to the state government had fallen on deaf ears.

“The BRO is yet to open the Tandi-Sissu-Koksar part of the highway. The government did not operate even a single flight from the Sissu helipad this winter, where over 40 people are still waiting for the state chopper so that they can fly to Kullu,” said Suman.

“We have been forced to live in dark ages without electricity and communication as the HPSEBL and the BSNL have not bothered to restore these services even after a month,” tribals rued.

They said the villagers had decided to boycott the Lok Sabha elections. “We are writing to the Election Commission of India, highlighting the problems people are facing,” they added.

They were living in six to eight feet of snow in the valley without the basic facilities, said Prem Singh, said a local on the telephone from Keylong.

Officialspeak

"The flights were cancelled due to bad weather. There is 8 feet of snow in the area and the BRO will take 15 days to clear the road. We are in touch with them." Ashwani Chaudhary, DC-cum-district election officer

Residentspeak

"The BRO is yet to open the Tandi-Sissu-Koksar part of the highway. The government did not operate even a single flight from the Sissu helipad this winter, where over 40 people are still waiting for the state chopper so that they can fly to Kullu." Suman, area resident

"We have been forced to live in dark ages without electricity and communication as the HPSEBL and the BSNL have not bothered to restore these services even after a month. The villagers have decided to boycott the Lok Sabha elections. We are writing to the Election Commission of India, highlighting the problems people are facing." Area residents
