L&T ready to sign Mindtree deal with CCD founder VG Siddhartha; Subroto Bagchi returns to save IT company

File photo | Photo Credit: BCCL

New Delhi: Engineering major Larsen & Toubro (L&T) is poised to takeover Bengaluru-headquartered IT company Mindtree by acquiring around 21 per cent stake held by Café Coffee Day founder V G Siddhartha and launch an open offer for an additional 31 per stake in the software services company, possibly as early as Monday (March 18) evening, the Economic Times reported citing several people aware of the matter.



In a letter to the L&T board on Saturday, Mindtree chairman and co-founder Krishnakumar Natarajan has warned against a hostile takeover bid by the engineering conglomerate, as per the report.



L&T is eager to act quickly before Mindtree’s board meeting on Wednesday (March 20) to consider a buyback proposal that’s seen as an attempt to foil the diversified conglomerate’s bid. Meanwhile, several reports suggested that Mindtree is talking to key institutional investors to thwart attempts L&T’s from making a hostile bid.



The infrastructure behemoth’s offer price for an additional 31 per cent share is likely to be around Rs 980 apiece, a 4 per cent premium to Friday’s closing price of Rs 946. Citi and Axis Capital are believed to be working on the open offer. KPMG Corporate Finance is the main adviser to L&T, the publication said.



Siddhartha, the largest shareholder, had in several tranches pledged almost the entire 21 per cent stake held by him along with two affiliate companies to several domestic and foreign lenders including Yes Bank, Kotak Mahindra, RBL, Edelweiss, Standard Chartered and Axis to borrow funds for various group activities, the report stated.



“This will help him and L&T both as the share transfer will be easier now. Instead of so many lenders, they will now have to get a NoC (no objection certificate) only from one,” a lender with direct knowledge of the development told ET. “A distributed pledge adds to the complexity as the repayment schedule is different for all.”



Meanwhile, Subroto Bagchi, one of the co-founders of Mindtree, resigned on Sunday as the head of Odisha Skill Development Authority to return to the information technology company in Bengaluru. “An imminent threat of hostile takeover of Mindtree has made me resign from the Government to be able to go, save the company. I must protect the Tree from people who have arrived with bulldozers and saw chains to cut it down so that in its place, they can build a shopping mall," he wrote on micro-bogging site Twitter.

An imminent threat of hostile takeover of Mindtree has made me to resign from the Government to be able to go, save the company. I must protect the Tree from people who have arrived with bulldozers & saw chains to cut it down so that in its place, they can build a shopping mall. — Subroto Bagchi (@skilledinodisha) March 17, 2019



On Friday, the IT company informed stock exchanges that its board will meet on March 20 to consider a buyback. Mindtree's last buyback was in 2017. Mindtree had a net worth of Rs 2,741 crore at the end FY18, ET mentioned citing the firm's annual report. It can buyback shares worth Rs 274 crore without a special resolution, and Rs 685 crore after a special resolution. The company had around Rs 1,049 crore in reserves, including investments, at the end of FY18.



Many analysts are of the opinion that Mindtree faces the risk of management change as its largest shareholder is reportedly considering to offload his stake.
