Wild Edens: South Asia- A new feature documentary dedicated to the fight against global warming

The premiere of a new documentary "Wild Edens

The documentary puts an emphasis on the unique and delicate habitats of India and Bangladesh and the region's rarest and most spectacular wildlife. Brought to you by Rosatom, it will be broadcasted by National Geographic starting this spring.

Rosatom State Atomic Energy Corporation, the world's leading producer of safe and clean energy, is deeply concerned by the threats associated with climate change. The nuclear power industry is constantly evolving and has firmly established itself as an integral part of the green energy mix.

The Wild Edens seeks to highlight the threat of global warming to flora and fauna around the globe as well as the importance of nuclear energy, as a low-carbon energy source, in decarbonization.

The "Wild Edens: South Asia" captures the region's breathtaking landscapes, where wildlife may be endangered in the future. From dense forests to remote deserts, along with wild mountain ranges to the mighty River Ganges, the South Asian nature has a story for each and every one.

Freida Pinto, actress and activist, the Wild Edens project ambassador will be the special guest of the event. Freida is not just a terrific actress but a true nature lover, who throughout the years has supported multiple sustainable development causes, including the UN Global Goals campaign. She gave her voice to the film and expressed her excitement about the film being shot in her home country.

"We all share a common vision that humankind has to be inspired to focus on the planet before the effects of global warming become absolutely irreversible. I would also like to say how pleased I am that Wild Edens will devote an entire episode to my native country of India. With this, millions of people around the world will have the opportunity to see my country as an exotic mix of wild nature, rare animal life, unique wildlife sanctuaries and magnificent landscapes that are mesmerizing and are also under the threat of dangers of climate change", said Ms Pinto.

This story is provided by NewsVoir. ANI will not be responsible in any way for the content of this article.

(This story has not been edited by Business Standard staff and is auto-generated from a syndicated feed.)
