Embassy Office Parks REIT: Embassy REIT IPO proceeds to pare debt and help in acquisitions: Mike Holland, CEO, Real Estate News, ET RealEstate

We will be bringing down debt from 27-285 to sub 15% level, said Mike Holland, CEO, Embassy Office Parks REIT, in an interview with ETNOW.



Edited excerpts:

It is a Rs 4,750-crore primary offering. The book is open Monday to Wednesday. The portfolio is great. It is a 33 million square-foot portfolio with a 160 super tenants across four cities. The proceeds from the listing will be used to lower existing debt from 28% to sub 15% and for acquisition of another super asset called MC-1 in Bangalore.The current ratio of debt to GAV is approximately 27-28% so we are not very heavily indebted but we will be bringing that down to a sub 15% level. The reason for that is that we would then have capital available to later go out for acquisitions, perhaps bringing that debt level up to 30-35% in due course.As for rental yields, occupiers are paying us a rental every month. Our portfolio is 95% occupied. Our initial yield is 8.25% yield to investors which is growing every quarter and every year as rental escalations kick in and as we build more buildings on the park and generate more rentals. We see 15% growth per annum in that income over these three years.In certain assets, it is the largest and highest quality assets. SEBI wisely has a restriction on development assets within the portfolio. We sometimes refer to that as the 80:20 rule, 80% of the REIT must be completed and income producing for us. Any assets which Embassy has which qualify as completed and of the right scale, are in the REIT.Our portfolio is occupied at 95%. We do not have a lot of vacant real estate that is available for leasing. This year, we have had a million square feet of lease expiries and mark to market on those lease expiries is in excess of 40%. The ability to get those mark to markets on lease expiry have been proven for a number of years. We believe we will be able to continue to do that.
