Priyanka Gandhi takes dig at PM Narendra Modi, says 'chowkidars are for rich, not farmers'

File Image of Priyanka Gandhi | Photo Credit: ANI

Prayagraj: Congress general secretary Priyanka Gandhi on Monday took a potshot at Prime Minister Narendra Modi, saying that chowkidars are for rich, not farmers.

Earlier today, Priyanka kicked off her three-day Ganga yatra from Prayagraj to Varanasi, kick-starting poll campaign in BJP’s stronghold for Lok Sabha elections.

Addressing a gathering in Dumdum, Congress chief Rahul Gandhi’s sister said, “(Unki [Prime Minister] marzi apne naam ke aage kya lagaen. Mujhe ek kisan bhai ne kaha ki 'dekhiye chowkidaar to ameeron ke hote hain, hum kisan to apne khud chowkidaar hote hain.(This is his personal choice that what he wants to add before his name. A farmer told me that ‘chowkidars are for rich not farmers, we farmers are our own chowkidars’.”

PM Modi recently changed his Twitter profile by adding 'chowkidar' prefix to his name.

The Congress general secretary of eastern Uttar Pradesh also attacked the ruling dispensation and said, 'We will fight for your rights, the government is not hearing your voice.”

Priyanka, who arrived in Prayagraj on Sunday night, will cover a distance of 140 kilometres in three days during her Ganga yatra. The boat rally started from Chhatnag in Prayagraj on Monday morning and will end at Assi Ghat in Varanasi.

Earlier in the day, she offered prayers at Bade Hanuman temple in Prayagraj before offering prayers at Sangam.

Before starting her boat yatra, Priyanka, in an open letter, said, "The holy Ganga is symbolic for truth and equality. The people of this state depend on the Ganges and I will depend on Ganga too to connect to you."

Earlier, while addressing a rally in Prayagraj, she hit out at BJP and said that she would not allow anyone create divides between the people of the country.

“We are here because of you only and we would not be here without you. The power is in your hands. If you choose Congress government in the coming elections, and support Rahul Gandhi, it will bring development for you,” she said, adding that her party and Rahul fulfil all the promises they make in the elections.

Priyanka will be in Mirzapur and PM Modi’s constituency Varanasi on March 19 and 20 where she will visit Kashivishwanath temple and celebrate holy with party workers.
