Another scare involving Airbus 320neo engine! GoAir Mumbai-Delhi flight experiences rude vibration, grounded

Representational image | Photo Credit: PTI

Mumbai: In another seriously scary incident involving an Airbus 320neo aircraft, a GoAir flight was grounded in Mumbai after experiencing high vibration in the engine. The GoAir flight G8 319 was travelling from Mumbai to Delhi. All 160 passengers on board the plane are reported to be safe, news agency ANI said.

The incident came just days after an IndiGo Chennai-Kolkata flight was involved in a massive scare. As per details available with Times Now, passengers of IndiGo’s January 3 flight 6E 923 (Neo) heard a loud bang and noted sparks and smoke coming out of the engine mid-air.

All this was witnessed shortly after take-off of the flight from the Chennai airport. The flight shortly returned to Chennai amid heavy vibration of engines, it was learned.

Airbus A320neo aircraft, which IndiGo and GoAir operate in India, have been encountering problems and causing mid-air scares.

The January 3 incident was considered as among the most serious ones as all the problems, which the Neo category of planes have been encountering, were experienced in a single flight - smoke, heavy vibration, loud bang and stalling of the engine.

Since December 10, it was the third incident involving a Neo aircraft that witnessed smoke coming out of them. It was reported that the engine blades of the plane were completely burned in the January 3 incident.

IndiGo had, however, denied that the plane made an emergency landing in Chennai.

“Flight 6E 923 (Neo) operating on Chennai-Kolkata route on 3 Jan returned to Chennai after take-off due to technical caution noted by crew. Crew followed normal operating procedures and asked for priority landing. There was no engine shutdown and no emergency landing was declared,” IndiGo said in a statement.

Times Network - India's Leading Broadcasting Network, uniquely offering English Entertainment, best in class News channels & Bollywood Masala, available at a Value pack (7 channels) of Rs 13/- per month.

Please contact your cable/DTH service provider now and ensure that your TV viewing experience is complete. To know more click here.
