Nirav Modi: Cornered in UK, Nirav Modi’s arrest imminent

Nirav Modi to appear in Westminster magistrates’ court next week

London: Wanted diamantaire Nirav Modi is expected to be arrested, and appear in Westminster magistrates’ court next week.A top Indian government source told TOI on Monday: “The CBI team handling Nirav Modi has been put together and will be flying to London within the next week. The ED will also be sending someone. They need to give some evidence to the courts and then an arrest is expected to happen soon afterwards so the CBI and ED will be present in court when he is produced before Westminsters’ magistrates court after he is arrested.”The source said the exact date all this is to happen “had not been finalised yet but the process is on and it is expected to happen next week”.“Once they are in London it will all happen. There is no danger of him leaving the UK in the meantime as he does not have any travel documents. He won’t be arrested till the UK authorities get these documents that the CBI and ED are bringing,” the government source added.TOI had revealed last week that Modi, 48, has been travelling in and out of Europe and the US on a revoked Indian passport since February 2018 but since an Interpol red corner notice was issued in September last year, he has not been able to leave Britain.A spokeswoman for the metropolitan police extradition unit, who will carry out the arrest, confirmed Modi had not been arrested yet. “We would not confirm anything until the person is arrested and has appeared in court. We can’t say anything until someone has been arrested. We would not confirm if there is an international arrest warrant out for someone,” she said.The ED confirmed on March 9 that UK home secretary Sajid Javid had referred a request for Modi’s extradition, received from India last August, to the district judge at Westminster magistrates’ court to issue an international arrest warrant.A member of staff at the magistrates’ court confirmed Modi was not on their system. “We do not have a person on our system until they have been arrested. The court cannot comment on any international arrest warrant until someone is arrested.”On March 8 Modi was discovered living openly in a luxury three-bedroom flat worth £8 million in London’s West End. He had grown a handlebar moustache and was photographed wearing a £12,000 ostrich-hide jacket.TOI revealed last week that he has started a new business called Diamond Holdings, with an office in Soho, and that he entered the UK on a Tier-1 (investor) visa from New York in February 2018, the same month he was accused by Punjab National Bank of swindling the bank through his companies using fraudulent letters of undertaking.
