Mayawati, Akhilesh Yadav warn Congress against spreading rumours

Lucknow: A day after the Congress said it was leaving seven Lok Sabha seats for the SP-BSP-RLD combine in Uttar Pradesh, BSP supremo Mayawati Monday asked the national party not to “spread confusion” and said the alliance was capable of defeating the BJP on its own. At the same time, she dared the Congress to go ahead and field candidates in all the 80 Lok Sabha seats in the state.

In the wake of her comments, the Samajwadi Party (SP) also asked the grand old party not to spread any kind of confusion while maintaining that the BSP-SP-RLD alliance is capable of defeating the BJP in Uttar Pradesh.

The parliamentary elections in Uttar Pradesh will be held in seven phases.

Hours later, the BSP’s poll ally SP also asked

the Congress not to spread any kind of confusion and maintained that the BSP-SP-RLD alliance was capable of defeating the BJP in Uttar Pradesh.

The BSP chief in a series of tweets made it clear that the party will not enter into any alliance with the Congress.

On Sunday, the Congress announced that it was leaving seven Lok Sabha seats in the state for the SP, Bahujan Samaj Party (BSP) and Rashtriya Lok Dal (RLD) alliance.

“The Congress is free to field its candidates on all the 80 seats in Uttar Pradesh alone. In other words, our alliance (of SP-BSP-RLD) is capable enough of defeating the BJP. The Congress should refrain from spreading confusion about leaving seven seats for the (SP-BSP-RLD)alliance,” Ms Mayawati said in a tweet.

In a tweet, SP president Akhilesh Yadav said, “In Uttar Pradesh, the SP, BSP and RLD alliance is capable of defeating the BJP. The Congress party need not spread any kind of confusion.”

Ms Mayawati also said, “The BSP would like to m-ake it clear once again there is no alliance or un-derstanding with the Co-ngress in UP and anywhere in the country.”

“Our party workers should not succumb to confusion being spread almost everyday by the Congress,” she said.
