Karnataka: Fear of sabotage compels Cong, JD(S) to keep an eye on each other

With speculation over the alliance partners scuttling each other in the upcoming Lok Sabha polls, the coalition partners in Karnataka called for truce and vowed to unitedly fight the BJP. However, the allies will soon appoint an observer from each party in every parliamentary constituency to keep a tab on any "anti-coalition" activities by leaders or workers.

During a joint press meet held in Bengaluru on Tuesday, coordination committee chief Siddaramaiah announced a joint election rally near Mysuru on March 31.

"We will kick-start the joint campaign from Mysuru in the presence of AICC president Rahul Gandhi and leaders of both parties to show unity of coalition," said Siddaramaiah, who addressed the reporters along with former prime minister H.D. Deve Gowda, Chief Minister H.D. Kumaraswamy, KPCC chief Dinesh Gundu Rao, Water Resources Minister D.K. Shivakumar and KPCC working president Eshwar Khandre.

"Both parties will give a stern direction to their respective MPs, MLAs, leaders and cadres. We must bury our differences, and work with a single point agenda of defeating the BJP. We will appoint observers in each parliamentary constituency to monitor the situation. I believe our party workers will abide by our decisions to help us defeat the political opponents,” Siddaramaiah said.

Ironically, the joint rally will kick off from Mysuru as the district had turned into a battleground between the JD(S) and the Congress during the last assembly elections, resulting in the humiliating defeat of incumbent chief minister and Kuruba strongman Siddaramaiah in Chamundeshwari. It was alleged that the region saw mobilisation of Vokkaliga community against Siddaramaiah and the Congress party.

While the arch rivals came together to form a coalition after the assembly elections threw up a fractured verdict, the hostility between the two continues in the Old Mysuru region. The alliance was welcomed by only senior leaders and not the local leaders and cadres in many constituencies.

Now, with the seat-sharing agreement splitting the 28 seats between the two allies (Congress- 20 and JD(S)-8), there is growing unrest among the local leaders and potential candidates. The Deve Gowda family senses trouble in their own bastion, Mandya, where Nikhil Kumaraswamy will take on veteran actor Sumalatha Ambareesh. The Congress leaders in Mandya are openly pledging their support to Sumalatha too.

The leaders of both parties went into a huddle and worked out a strategy to unite and send a strong message to the party cadres and rebels, who might jeopardise the coalition's prospects in the polls.

"In the bypolls held in Bellary, Ramanagara, Mandya, Jamkhandi and Shimoga, the coalition lost only Shimoga, but by a small margin of 50,000 votes. Yeddyurappa had won the seat in 2014 by a huge margin. This time, we want to totally defeat BJP, which wants to see a "Congress-mukt" Karnataka, added Siddaramaiah.

Admitting there were minor issues in a few constituencies, Kumaraswamy said they could be easily resolved with talks. "Both Deve Gowda and Siddaramaiah are capable of tackling any challenges. The March 31 rally will be a historical election campaign, which will send out a strong message of unity," said the chief minister, who also stressed upon the need to build confidence among the party workers and people.

Deve Gowda urged Siddaramaiah to ensure spokespersons of both parties give a joint statement on every issue rather than give separate statements, which may lead to misunderstandings.

"We will not wait till March 31 to launch the campaign as it is already too late. In the Old Mysuru region, the first phase of elections will be conducted on April 18. Any differences and difficulties in any constituency will be tackled by me, Siddaramaiah, Kumaraswamy, D.K. Shivakumar and Parameshwara,"said Deve Gowda, adding that the parties would issue a stern warning to the district heads against making any comments that would adversely impact the coalition.

"What will happen in Mysuru and Mandya is being speculated. We will sit and iron out all differences and ensure we win in both seats. You wait and watch the results. We will surely succeed," said Deve Gowda, who hoped that the rally in Mysuru would set new precedence for future coalitions.

"We decided to launch a joint campaign to send out the secular message not only at the national level but to the world. Modi speaks lightly of Mahagathbandhan. But he doesn't realise the BJP is running a coalition government in 15 states," he noted.

The JD(S) patriarch also declared that the coalition would not allow the BJP to reach double digits this polls, saying, "At present, the BJP holds 16 seats, Congress 10 and we hold two. This time, we will not allow the BJP to reach double digits. Our decision is in favour of Rahul Gandhi. We are taking the message to the people that both parties are united and we will highlight the good work done during the Siddaramaiah government and now the coalition government."
