Traders burn Chinese goods to protest move on Azhar

Kolkata: Traders burn Chinese goods as they protest against China for blocking India's bid to have Pakistan-based Jaish-e-Mohammed (JeM) Chief Masood Azhar designated as a global terrorist by the United Nations (UN), in Kolkata on March 19, 2019. (Ph Image Source: IANS News

Kolkata: Traders burn Chinese goods as they protest against China for blocking India's bid to have Pakistan-based Jaish-e-Mohammed (JeM) Chief Masood Azhar designated as a global terrorist by the United Nations (UN), in Kolkata on March 19, 2019. (Ph Image Source: IANS News

Kolkata: Traders burn Chinese goods as they protest against China for blocking India's bid to have Pakistan-based Jaish-e-Mohammed (JeM) Chief Masood Azhar designated as a global terrorist by the United Nations (UN), in Kolkata on March 19, 2019. (Ph Image Source: IANS News

Kolkata, March 19 : Protesting against China for blocking India's bid to have Pakistan-based Jaish-e-Mohammed (JeM) Chief Masood Azhar designated as a global terrorist by the UN, traders on Tuesday set fire to Chinese goods at more than 1,500 places across the country.

"Traders across the country gave a strong message to China by burning Chinese goods ahead of the Holi festival. They set Chinese goods on fire at more than 1,500 places all over the country," Confederation of All India Traders (CAIT) National Secretary General Praveen Khandelwal said.

China had recently blocked India's fourth attempt at the United Nations (UN) to declare Azhar as a global terrorist.

India's attempts to impose sanctions against the Pakistan-based terrorist came again after a suicide attack claimed by the JeM in Kashmir's Pulwama district killed 40 Central Reserve Police Force (CRPF) personnel.

The traders' body also asked its members to boycott Chinese goods in the country.

The demonstrators held placards in their hands urging people to "boycott Chinese goods and warning both China and Pakistan to break their nexus against India".

Condemning the neighbouring country, CAIT West Bengal President Komal Jain said the traders are very "annoyed with China" and urged the government to put restrictions on trade with it.

According to the traders, the items being imported from China are largely toys, electronics, mobiles, FMCG products, hardware goods, electrical items and festival material, which do not involve any major technology.

"Since our SMEs are capable enough to produce these goods with good quality and at affordable prices, the government should encourage small industries and give them a special package so that our people can compete with China," CAIT West Bengal Secretary General Raja Roy said.

The traders also urged the government to conduct a "strict investigation" at Indian ports on each import from China as "goods being imported from China are highly undervalued".
