LS polls 2019: Notification for phase 2 released, two ministers accused of violating poll code- 19th March election wrap

Babul Supriyo and Jayant Sinha, two union ministers have been accused of violating poll code. An FIR was registered against Union minister Jayant Sinha for allegedly violating the model code of conduct while addressing students at the convocation ceremony of a management institute here, police said Tuesday.

Sinha is the Union Minister of State for Civil Aviation and a BJP MP from Hazaribagh constituency in Jharkhand.Addressing the students at IIM-Ranchi on Saturday, Sinha had allegedly sought their "blessings" for another five years, the officer said.

The Election Commission Tuesday issued a show-cause notice to Union minister Babul Supriyo for putting out a campaign song, composed and sung by him, without prior permission, officials said.

Here are the other major election headlines from March 19.

Election notification issued for phase 2:

The Election Commission Tuesday issued a notification kick starting the poll process in 97 constituencies spread across 13 states where phase two of the Lok Sabha elections will be held on April 18.

The process of nomination began with the issuance of this notification and will continue till March 26. Scrutiny of the nomination papers will be held on March 27 and the last day of withdrawing nomination is March 29.

BJP CEC meets to finalise candidates:

BJP CEC is meeting to finalise candidates for the upcoming Lok Sabha elections. Originally on Monday, BJP was supposed to release its first list but it was delayed after Manohar Parrikar's death. PM Narendra Modi, BJP President Amit Shah are among those who are taking a final call on candidates who will be fighting the elections in less than a month's time.

DMK-AIADMK release manifestoes:

Rival Tamil parites DMK and AIADMK published their poll manifestoes on Tuesday. ) Manifestos of arch rivals DMK and AIADMK released Tuesday bore a striking similarity on a number of issues, including on the release of seven convicts in the Rajiv Gandhi assassination.

The rivals also spoke in one voice on providing reservation in the private sector and called for government control on fixing the price of petroleum products to keep their prices under check.

DMK President M K Stalin and AIADMK Coordinator O Panneerselvam released their respective list of assurances to the electorate ahead of the polls, scheduled on April 18.

While DMK wanted the convicts in the Rajiv Gandhi assassination to be released on "humanitarian grounds", the ruling AIADMK said it would insist that the Centre and the President direct Tamil Nadu Governor Banwarilal Purohit to allow them to walk free.

Left announces candidates in Bengal:

The CPI(M)-led Left Front Tuesday announced candidates for 13 more Lok Sabha seats in West Bengal, taking the total number of its contestants to 38.The grouping, however, kept its door for seat sharing talks with the Congress open till Wednesday evening by not declaring nominees in four seats, which the national party had won in the 2014 general elections.

Even the list of 38 candidates could be altered if the Left Front gets a positive response from the Congress by tomorrow evening on an alliance, the front's chairman Biman Bose said.

MP Congress wants to rope in Salman Khan:

The Madhya Pradesh Congress has requested Bollywood megastar Salman Khan to breach the BJP's Indore citadel in the ensuing Lok Sabha polls.The actor was born in Indore's Palasia area in 1965 and has spent a substantial part of his childhood in that city before moving to Mumbai."Our leaders have already talked to Salman Khan to campaign for us in Indore. We are sure the actor would campaign for us," MP Congress spokesperson Pankaj Chaturvedi said.

No transfer till end of election in Rajasthan

Rajasthan's chief electoral officer (CEO) Tuesday directed officials to ensure that no employees are transferred until the Lok Sabha polls are over in line with the election guidelines.

Anand Kumar said if the transfer order was not implemented till March 10, then the employee should not be relieved from his current post.

Pawan Kalyan to fight from two seats:

Jumping into the electoral battle for the first time, Telugu film star and Jana Sena founder Pawan Kalyan will contest the April 11 Assembly election in Andhra Pradesh from Gajuwaka and Bhimavaram constituencies.

Former IPS officer V V Lakshmi Narayana, who joined the party two days ago, will be the candidate from Visakhapatnam Lok Sabha seat.

Rahul in North East:

Congress chief Rahul Gandhi said Tuesday his party will restore the special category status to Arunachal Pradesh and other states in the northeast if elected to power.

There are some states in the country which require special status because of their "unique problems and difficulties" such as connectivity, terrain, infrastructure, Gandhi said at an election rally here.

During the Congress rule at the Centre, he said, Arunachal Pradesh and other NE states used to enjoy special category status.

Arunachal Pradesh has a special place in the heart of the Congress party and "we would like to have a 'dil ka rishta' with the people of the state", he said.

Priyanka Gandhi continues Ganga Yatra:

Congress general secretary Priyanka Gandhi on Tuesday said the ground reality was different than what the Uttar Pradesh government has been portraying and there is an expiry date to the rant that nothing was done in the past 70 years.

The Congress incharge of east Uttar Pradesh was responding to a question about the Adityanath government issuing its report card on completion of two years in office, in which it highlighted various achievements and welfare schemes.

"They (BJP) need to come to the ground to see the reality. This report card and publicity looks good, but the reality is different... all sections are feeling harassed," she said at the Sitamarhi guest house in Uttar Pradesh's Bhadohi district, where she had a night halt.
