Traders express resentment against China, burn Chinese goods ahead of Holi

In the wake of China using a veto in the UN Security Council against declaration of Masood Azhar as a global terrorist and continuously helping Pakistan in all forms, the Confederation of All India Traders (CAIT), while depicting the resentment of the countrymen against the attitude of China gave, a call for burning Chinese goods. Trade associations all over the country today put to fire Chinese goods at more than 1500 places including Delhi.

CAIT secretary general Praveen Khandelwal while expressing strong objections against China said that "traders are chowkidars of the Indian economy and henceforth the trade with China will not be encouraged anymore. He said that the traders will boycott any country that stands against the national security of India.

On the call of CAIT, traders across the country today gave a strong message to China by burning Chinese goods a day ahead of Holi festival.

In Delhi, the event was held at Sadar Bazar, the hub of Chinese goods. Thousands of traders from all parts of the city participated in the demonstration. They made a small hill of Chinese goods and put fire to it. The demonstrators while shouting slogans warned China to stop helping Pakistan in conducting terror activities in India otherwise Indian traders will dislodge China from India, which is the largest market for China.

The demonstrators were holding placards in their hands urging people to boycott Chinese goods and warned both China and Pakistan to break their nexus against India.

CAIT national president BC Bhartia and secretary general Praveen Khandelwal while strongly condemning China said that Indian traders are grossly annoyed with China, which is waging a backdoor war against Indian interests by helping Pakistan. They demanded the government to levy restrictions on trade with China.

Both Bhartia and Khandelwal said that largely the items being imported from China include toys, electronics, mobiles, FMCG products, hardware goods, electrical items, festival material. Since the Chinese goods are cheaper for many reasons, the consumers generally buy them without caring about the quality. Since our SMEs are capable enough to produce these goods at affordable prices, the government should encourage small Industries and give them a special package so that our people can compete with China.

Both trade leaders demanded that in order to minimise the imports from China, the government should immediately impose a customs duty ranging from 300 per cent to 500 per cent on imports from China and demand strict investigation at Indian ports for imported items from China that are highly undervalued. They recommended the government to confiscate such material and put them to auction at more than 50 per cent of the declared price. The government can thus yield substantial revenue.

Both Bhartia and Khandelwal said that the CAIT is launching a national campaign for the boycott of Chinese goods during which the traders will be educated as to how their money for purchasing Chinese goods is being used against interests of the country and will urge them to boycott purchasing or selling Chinese goods. On the other hand, a similar campaign will also be conducted for consumers, urging them to stop purchasing Chinese goods in the larger interest of the country. They said that crores of traders across the nation will be aligned with this campaign and efforts will be made to put economic pressure on China. The CAIT will join hands with national organisations of farmers, transporters, small industries, consumers, hawkers, self-help entrepreneurs, and women entrepreneurs.

Also read | Goldman Sachs upgrades India to overweight amid pre-election rally

Also read | Mukesh Ambani bailing out brother Anil may be watershed moment in their relationship: Experts

Also read | Jet Airways pilots threaten to stop flying from April 1 if salaries not paid
