India and Pakistan stepping up WAR preparations as India urgently purchases MORE missiles

India Pakistan: We are ready for war says Imran Khan

top stories direct to your inbox SUBSCRIBE Invalid email Sign up to receive our rundown of the day'sdirect to your inbox We use your sign-up to provide content in ways you've consented to and to improve our understanding of you. This may include adverts from us and 3rd parties based on our understanding. You can unsubscribe at any time. More info

The call comes after Pakistan reportedly sent all of its F-16 fighter jets to the Indian border and moved terror camps out of IAF’s reach. India has continued to maintain a high level of operational alertness during the hectic flying activity from both sides. The country requires more air-to-air missiles that jets on patrol carry to counter any attacks from the Pakistani Air Force (PAF).

A government source told the Economic Times: “These missiles have a certain life. “While stored in a canister, this is counted in terms of the age of the system in years but when fighters are operationally deployed, the life of the missile depends on the number of sorties being undertaken. “So we need fresh replenishments.” The Indian Army reportedly moved up emergency purchases of stock-up ammunition due to the heightened risk of conflict with Pakistan. READ MORE: India-Pakistan shooting ERUPTS as Pakistan Army ‘initiate attack’

India's Air Force has asked its government to urgently purchase more missiles amid growing tensions

Kashmiri outside his house beside bullet-riddled walls cause by cross-border firing

Pakistan demonstrates long range missile from JF17 Thunder

Pakistan’s supersonic F-16 fighter jets were reportedly detected on the Line of Control (LoC) in Kashmir less than a week ago. The source added: “The F16s have been distributed all across Pakistani airbases and are still trained at us. “They are continuing to undertake night flying and have their air defence network on alert.” The increased tensions follow Iran and India’s plans to team up against Pakistan after the terrorist attacks in February.

A Kashmiri woman is seen through the hole in the room of her house amid cross-fire
