More Ugandan students going to India for studies- Envoy

India's High Commissioner to Uganda Ravi Shankar has said the High Commission in Uganda issues out about 400 study visas to Ugandans seeking further studies in India every year, signifying continuous growth trend of relations between two countries.

He said this during the inauguration of annual education fair at Indian High Commission offices in Kampala on Monday, where representatives from India's top universities showcased study opportunities available for Ugandan students.

"We have built this relationship for many years with cooperation including trade, commerce and economic investments but most important is human resource capacity development and education.

I don't know if people are aware that every year, nearly 400 students go to India to study in undergraduates, postgraduates and PHD courses," said Shankar.

He explained that there are about 1,500 Ugandan students across all education institutes in India.

Shankar(holding a scissor) after the launch of the education fair

"Both government of India and High Commission here thought that we need to have some kind of institutional mechanism in place to attract students from not only Uganda but also other countries to study from India; that's why we came up with the education fair.

There's a lot of information from internet and other sources but if you want to get some specific information, it becomes difficult but can be provided in such events," the envoy said.

Das Diptiman, the chairman and managing director Educational Consultants India Limited EdCIL under Ministry of Human Resource Development in India explained that Indian government wants to increase number of foreign students studying from the country.

He said the target is to increase students' numbers by five times in the next half a decade.

"We have been mandated to drive this amazing programme "Study in India" which was launched last year. There are 30 target countries and we are happy to share that Uganda is one of eight African nations featuring on the list," said Diptiman.

He explained that students can apply to study from India via online to top India accredited universities and other institutions of higher learning.

"There are about 2,000 scholarships offered by these institutes to students globally; I think Africa would get some 500 scholarships being offered. Ugandan students are encouraged to come and apply to study in India," said Diptiman.

He added: "Since 1990s, we have added lots of top quality institutions both in private and public space and we are also services led economy, hence students especially those who have aspirations in science and technology can come and join. Other students in humanities and social sciences are also encouraged."
