AAP slams Union Minister Hardip Puri for his "anti-Delhi" stance

Aam Aadmi Party on Thursday hit back at Union Minister Hardeep Singh Puri questioning him his "anti-Delhi" stance.

This came after the Union Minister accused AAP of being desperate for an alliance while claiming that AAP's support base has been eroding.

AAP spokesperson Saurabh Bhardwaj said, "Hardeep Puri need not worry about the Aam Aadmi Party, he should tell the people of Delhi about his anti-Delhi approach. Puri, who has nothing worthwhile to show in his performance as a minister, is now venturing into the arena of electoral political analysis."

Puri reportedly had stated that AAP is desperate for an alliance with Congress, craving for political power. Questioning its credibility, Puri apparently wondered whether seven MPs of the capital city can get full statehood for Delhi in a House of 545 MPs.

Reacting to Puri's comment, Bhardwaj said, "AAP was born out of a movement for the creation of Lokpal, which Mr Puri's party promised in the run-up to 2014 Lok Sabha elections, and was forced to form this anti-corruption ombudsman following consistent questioning by the Supreme Court. Puri was not in then and therefore, might not be aware that AAP began its journey against corruption in Congress-led UPA government's tenure and is now fighting the authoritarian and dictatorial regime of Puri's party (BJP)."

While accusing the BJP led Central government of being authoritarian and dictatorial, the AAP spokesperson said, "Having been a career diplomat, who has served in many countries, Puri would well be knowing that authoritarian and dictatorial regimes don't last long and India is a country with a strong democracy where people will no longer tolerate a government which trampled the Constitution and destroyed federalism."

He warned that the BJP government's 'anti-people policies' will get a resounding reply in the forthcoming Lok Sabha elections.

Lok Sabha elections for all the seven seats in Delhi are scheduled to be conducted in a single phase on May 12.

The counting of the votes will be done on May 23.

(This story has not been edited by Business Standard staff and is auto-generated from a syndicated feed.)
