The Shillong Times

Effigies of Azhar, Saeed put up for burning in Patna

Patna: While burning ‘Ravana’ in a Holi bonfire is a common sight every year, residents of a neighbourhood in the Bihar capital this time have put up effigies of Jaish-e-Mohammed chief Masood Azhar and Mumbai attack mastermind Hafiz Saeed in the streets for torching them as part of the festive ritual. The effigies have been mounted on top of a huge pile of timber and broken twigs on a street in Kadam Kuan’s Nawal Kishor Road, and would be burnt tonight to mark ‘Holika Dahan’ or the eve of Holi. The pile faces a shop on the street side, selling colours, ‘pichkaris’ (water toy guns) and fancy masks, while an image of a jawan in combat fatigue and pointing a gun, has been put up on an electric pole in the corner of the road. “People from the local area have put effigies to show solidarity with the spirit that terror activities originating from Pakistani soil would not be tolerated by India and its people. (PTI)

Activist Gauri new EC envoy

Mumbai: Transgender activist Gauri Sawant has been appointed as one of the goodwill ambassadors of the Election Commission in Maharashtra. This is for the first time a transgender has been appointed as a goodwill ambassador. Till 2014, there was no separate classification of transgenders as voters. In 2014, transgenders were first enrolled as voters along with males and females. While 918 voters had enrolled themselves as transgenders in Maharashtra in 2014, the number has now gone up to 2,086. According to the election officials, the highest enrolment of transgenders (324) is in Mumbai North Lok Sabha constituency. (PTI)

No crashing weddings: NIT

New Delhi: The National Institute of Technology (NIT) in Kurukshetra has warned its students against “gate crashing” weddings near its premises. “It has been reported that some of the students have been going to attend weddings in the city without having invitation. This is not only unethical and immoral but also uncalled for,” a letter sent to hostel inmates by the Chief Warden said. Sources in the institute said that off late there have been complaints that students have been gate crashing weddings to skip meals in the mess which is why this directive was issued. The letter directed students to desist from indulging in such type of “uncivilised activities” which also brings a bad name to the institution. The letter warned students of disciplinary action if they are found doing so. “Disciplinary action as per the institute rules will be taken against the students if they are found indulging in such an activity,” the letter said. (PTI)

‘Be chowkidar for animals’

New Delhi: People for the Ethical Treatment of Animals (PETA) India Wednesday urged people to guard distressed animals as “chowkidars”, a terminology which got currency due to the political slugfest over it. The organisation, in its latest tweet, called on people to look out for animals in distress and to protect them from abuse by reporting cruelty. “Be a #chowkidar for animals and help guard them against abuse. Here’s how: http://petain.vg/4gc ,” the PETA tweeted Wednesday. The organisation gave a weblink to contact on to report about cruelty to animals. It also gave an emergency contact number — 98201 22602– to help distressed animals. (PTI)
