2007 Samjhauta Express blast case: 68 dead; all accused acquitted

PTI

Panchkula: A special court on Wednesday acquitted Swami Aseemanand and three others in the Samjhauta train blast case, saying the National Investigative Agency failed miserably to establish their guilt. NIA special judge Jagdeep Singh also dismissed the plea of a Pakistani woman for examining eyewitnesses from her country, saying the plea was “devoid of merit.”Later in the day, Islamabad summoned high commissioner Ajay Bisaria to lodge a protest against the acquittal. The terrorist attack on the train to Pakistan had killed 68 people, mostly Pakistanis, near Panipat on February 18, 2007. NIA counsel Rajan Malhotra said all four accused, Naba Kumar Sarkar, alias Swami Aseemanand, Lokesh Sharma, Kamal Chauhan and Rajinder Chaudhary were acquitted. As soon as the verdict was delivered, RSS pracharak Aseemanand chanted ‘Jai Sri Ram’.“I was falsely implicated. I said so from day one. I always had full faith in the judiciary,” Aseemanand told ET before leaving the court. He has been acquitted in the Mecca Masjid and Ajmer Sharif blast cases too, in which NIA had alleged he was the ‘mastermind’.He is already out on bail. Chauhan will walk free now but Lokesh Sharma and Rajendra Chaudhary are accused in other cases. NIA had named Lokesh Sharma, Kamal Chauhan and Rajendra Chaudhary as those who planted the bombs on the Samjhauta Express Aseemanand’s lawyer JP Sharma told ET: “a confession was recorded forcibly before a judge and used against him in all 3 cases. This court has thrown out the so-called confessions.”Pakistan’s acting foreign secretary told Bisaria that Islamabad had consistently raised the “lack of progress and the subsequent, concerted attempts by India to exonerate the perpetrators of this heinous terrorist act in which 44 innocent Pakistanis lost their lives. It also belies the rampant Indian duplicity and hypocrisy where India reflexively levels allegations of terrorism against Pakistan, while protecting with impunity, terrorists who had publicly confessed to their odious crimes,” he said. Sources said that Bisaria told Islamabad that there has been lack of cooperation and that even summons issued to Pakistani witnesses to appear in the court were returned and not allowed to be served. “These summons were returned by the Pakistan foreign office and not served,” sources said. The Indian side also pressed for an expeditious trial in the 26/11 Mumbai terror attack in which detailed evidence has been shared with Pakistan. “The High Commissioner expressed disappointment that progress in these trials is held up and the perpetrators and prime accused continue to roam freely in Pakistan,” sources said.
