Armie Hammer confirms that he would play Batman if asked by Warner Brothers

In January, Ben Affleck publicly quit his role as Batman ahead of the planned 2021 solo film of the Caped Crusader.

And on Wednesday, Armie Hammer stopped by Fallon Tonight, and addressed rumors that he would step into the shoes of the famed superhero.

The 32-year-old confirmed that he would love to do it if asked.

Would he or won't he? On Wednesday, Armie Hammer, 32, stopped by Fallon Tonight, and addressed rumors that he would take over the role of Batman after Ben Affleck's departure. He is seen in New York on Sunday

Host Jimmy Fallon, 44, questioned his thoughts on rumors around roles, and the star noted that 'none of the people who start rumors are actually the people who can give you jobs.'

'So it's always like, "oh are you, are you gonna play Batman?" And I'm like, well you just asked me, but guess who hasn't? Warner Brothers!' he said.

When asked if he has been approached to star in the film, The Social Network talent confirmed that he had not.

'No Da** it. No.'

'Would you consider it?' Jimmy pressed.

'Yea…who wouldn't want to be Batman?...It's a good gig!'

No one's offered: When asked if he has been approached to star in the film, The Social Network talent confirmed that he had not

'Yea…who wouldn't want to be Batman?': When asked if he would 'consider it,' he confirmed that he would love to do it. Ben Affleck is seen with Gal Gadot and Henry Cavill in a promotional still from Batman v. Superman Dawn of Justice

Jimmy also asked the married father-of-two if he and his Call Me By Your Name co-star, Timothee Chalamet would team up for a sequel to their 2017 film.

The actor said that the duo would be 'down', but didn't know for sure. He confirmed that the book's author, André Aciman, and director Luca Guadagnino are interested in moving forward.

'Who knows,' he began. 'Here's the deal. André Aciman wants to write another book. Luca wants to write the script. Timmy and I are down, as long as they give us each $12 million dollars,' he joked.

'But yeah, so I mean, who knows. who knows.'

He's coming back: Jimmy also asked the married father-of-two if he and his Call Me By Your Name co-star, Timothee Chalamet would team up for a sequel to their 2017 film. He is seen with wife Elizabeth Chambers, 36, in January in Beverly Hills

The actor is expected to return for his role as Oliver in a Call Me By Your Name sequel.

He'll also take the lead in Death on the Nile, Rebecca, Dreamland and Wounds.

Armie can next be seen in the based-on-a-true-story film, Hotel Mumbai. The Santa Monica native will play David, a married Taj Mahal Palace hotel guest who must decide if he and his wife should separate, in order to save their child in the midst of the 2008 Islamic terrorist attack in India.
