Cong’s LS candidate backs Sanatan Sanstha man

Vaibhav Raut

Lok Sabha election

Ratnagiri-Sindhudurg constituency

Hindu Janjagruti Samiti has praised Navin Bandivdekar’s particiption in the rallies in Vaibhav Raut’s support and publicised it on the Samiti’s website

Navinchandra Bandivdekar attended meetings in favour ofbooked under Unlawful Activities (Prevention) Act; Cong says he’s s only backing stand of community he represents.The Congress has fielded a candidate in the upcomingfrom, who has been openly supporting Sanatan Sanstha’s Vaibhav Raut. Raut is in jail after his arrest by the Anti-Terrorist Squad (ATS) under Unlawful Activities (Prevention) Act. The ATS had also allegedly seized explosives from Raut’s residence.Navinchandra Bandivdekar, 63, has not only been supporting Raut but also led two rallies in Nallasopara, called janasamvad sabhas, organised by Sanantan Sanstha. Bandivdekar is a resident of Mumbai and runs a Chinese cuisine restaurant chain in the city. He hails from Naringre village, Devgad taluka of Sindhudurg district. Bandivdekar is also the national president of All India Bhandari Samaj.On Thursday many took it to Twitter to question Congress leadership for fielding a right-wing candidate from Ratnagiri-Sindhudurg constituency.Bandivdekar, however, tried to distance himself from Sanatan Sanstha, and said, “As a national president of Bhandari community, I am supporting Vaibhav Raut as he is from our community. From day one, we have been saying that Raut is not a terrorist unless proved in the court.”When this correspondent pointed out that explosives were seized from Raut’s residence Bandivdekar said, “Let the court conclude who planted the explosives. What if the explosives were planted by the ATS? We can’t trust the ATS.”Bandivdekar defended Raut as a cow vigilant social activist from the Bhandari community.Ironically, Congress’s Maharashtra president Ashok Chavan and Leader of Opposition in state Legislative Assembly Radhakrishana Vikhe Patil had demanded a ban on Sanatan Sanstha and arrest of Raut after the seizure of the explosives. The Congress had then called Sanatan Sanstha a terrorist outfit.Bandivdekar has been a member of the Congress party since 2005. He claims that he has not been active in politics since 2008. He claims that he has been focusing on ‘social work’ for the last many years.“I am aware of the Congress party’s stand on Raut’s arrest but I have my own opinion as a president of my community’s organisation. I will support Raut until the court gives a final verdict against him.”Bandivdekar has not contested any election before. Congress was finding it difficult to find a candidate for Ratnagiri-Sindhudurg seat.Earlier, the Congress had offered this seat to Raju Shetti Swabhimani Shetkari Sanghtana, but the Sanghtana declined the offer, saying they did not have a base in the constituency. Bandivdekar was ready to contest from the seat.Shiv Sena’s Vinayak Raut is a sitting MP from this constituency. He defeated the former MP Nilesh Rane who had contested on the Congress ticket. This time, Nilesh is contesting from the constituency on the Maharashtra Swabhiman Paksh ticket.In this constituency Bhandari is the second biggest community after Maratha and is followed by Gabhit (fisherfolk) and Vani communities.Congress spokeperson Sachin Sawant has defended the party’s decision. “Bandivdekar has no connection whatsoever with sanatan Sanstha. He has neither participated in the activities of the Sanstha nor has any sympathy for it. Since there was pressure from the community considering rumours of presumably prejudiced action by the police (against Raut), as president of Bhandari Samaj, Bandivdekar had gone to inquire about it. He had demanded action according to law.”Sawant said Bandivdekar has clarified that it was an initial reaction to the rumours. “Moreover, it was not Bandivdekar’s own reaction, but of the community he represented. Also, it was only related to the demand for justified action. After understanding the reality, the issue was over. Nobody knew till then the person’s involvement in heinous acts. He opposes strongly the ideology of Sanatan Sanstha and their followers and will keep opposing it.
