India-Pakistan WARNING: Pakistan’s aggression against India ‘not acceptable’ says Trump

Trump says US relationship with Pakistan is 'good'

top stories direct to your inbox SUBSCRIBE Invalid email Sign up to receive our rundown of the day'sdirect to your inbox We use your sign-up to provide content in ways you've consented to and to improve our understanding of you. This may include adverts from us and 3rd parties based on our understanding. You can unsubscribe at any time. More info

The White House has attacked Pakistan for providing “sanctuary” to any terrorist groups in their country. A US official told CCN: “The terrorist attack on February 14 on India was a demonstration that Pakistan’s continuing provision of sanctuary for any terrorist group is not acceptable. We need to see Pakistan taking concrete and sustained action to rein in the terrorist groups, mainly the Jaish-e-Mohammed and the Lashkar-e-Taiba in order to ensure that we don’t have re-escalation of tensions in the region.”

The official added any further terrorist attacks against India would be “extremely problematic” implying the US could threaten intervention in the conflict. The US has promised its support to India following the car bombing attack on February 14 which killed 40 people. US President Donald Trump said their support “strengthens our resolve to bolster counter-terrorism cooperation and coordination between the US and India.” The US is also currently in trade talks with China which India is a key part of. READ MORE: India and Pakistan military on ‘ALERT’ amid fears of fresh violence

Pakistan has been warned against its aggression towards India by Trump

Clashes in Kashmir on the Line of Control

The US response follows India purchasing more missiles to combat any attacks from Pakistan on the Line of Control (LoC). Pakistan’s supersonic F-16 fighter jets were reportedly detected on the Line of Control (LoC) in Kashmir less than a week ago. The government source: “The F16s have been distributed all across Pakistani airbases and are still trained at us. “They are continuing to undertake night flying and have their air defence network on alert.”

Villagers gather near a residential house which was damaged during a gunfight
