Catching them young

Delivering his Independence Day speech from the ramparts of the Red Fort in 2017, Prime Minister Narendra Modi had said: "January 1, 2018, will not be an ordinary day-those born in this century will start turning 18. For these people, this is a decisive year of their lives. They are going to be the creators of the destiny of our nation in the 21st century." Six months later, in a nearly two-hours-long meeting with BJP president Amit Shah and Ram Lal, the Rashtriya Swayamsevak Sangh (RSS) representative in the BJP, Modi asked the two to chalk out a comprehensive plan to reach out to the millennial voters-those born in this century and eligible to exercise their franchise for the first time in the 2019 general election. On March 10, when the Election Commission (EC) announced the Lok Sabha election schedule, the prime minister made a direct appeal to 84 million voters who have joined the electoral rolls this year-"Vote in record numbers."

Modi's unwavering focus on first-time voters is not without reason. According to a survey by the Delhi-based Centre for the Study of Developing Societies (CSDS), first-time voters were the biggest supporters of the BJP in the 2014 Lok Sabha election. In the 18-22 age group, twice as many people voted for the saffron party as for the Congress. An analysis by the London-based political scientist Oliver Heath in 2015 had found that contrary to the popular perception it wasn't so much that the voters had turned their backs on the incumbent Congress, it was more the BJP's ability to mobilise first-time voters that helped the party win a landslide in 2014. While the Congress lost votes in unprecedented numbers, only about a third of the party's supporters had switched allegiance to the BJP. As Heath explains, the BJP successfully attracted voters who had previously not been mobilised effectively, and in places where the party had been weaker in earlier elections. Modi acknowledges this. In Exam Warriors, a book written by the prime minister to help students bust examination stress, one of the paragraphs describing the author reads: "His victory was propelled by historic support from India's youth, particularly first-time voters."

RACE FOR THE YOUNG VOTE

Over the years, the focused engagement with new voters has resulted in a sharp rise in the turnout in the 18-25 age group-from 54 per cent in the 2009 Lok Sabha election to 68 per cent in 2014. In fact, 2014 was the first time in Indian electoral history that the turnout of first-time voters was higher than the overall voting turnout of 66. With political pundits predicting a similar trend in 2019, not only the BJP, but almost all major political parties have been drawing up plans to snatch a big slice of the young vote bank, which constitutes 9 per cent of the electorate.

Rahul Gandhi's revival plan for the Congress hinges on the ability of his party candidates to emerge as the first choice of the 84 million first-time voters. For the record, in 2014, the total difference of votes between the BJP and the Congress was 64 million. In 2019, on an average, every constituency will have approximately 155,000 first-time voters. Assuming an overall turnout of 70 per cent in this segment, some 108,500 first-time voters will exercise their franchise in each of the 543 Lok Sabha constituencies. How critical this vote can be is established by the fact that in 2014, the victory margin was less than 100,000 votes in 188 constituencies and the Congress finished second in 224 seats. In 92 constituencies, the winning margin was less than 5 per cent of the total votes polled.

But to turn the tide of young voters in its favour, the Congress will have to mount a mammoth campaign and outgun the BJP electoral machinery, which has been at work for more than a year. The BJP's mission is led by Modi himself. He is not only the party's prime campaigner but also its most reliable brand. And brand Modi may have just got a boost following India's 'pre-emptive' air strike on a terrorist camp inside Pakistan in the aftermath of the February 14 suicide attack on CRPF troopers in Pulwama. Against the backdrop of the drubbing in Madhya Pradesh, Rajasthan and Chhattisgarh last December, the outcry over unemployment and agrarian distress and opposition alliances in the works to dislodge Modi, the recent round of India-Pakistan tensions has arguably given the BJP an opportunity to bounce back.

HEAD-START ADVANTAGE FOR BJP?

Several first-time voters that INDIA TODAY correspondents spoke to across the country saw national security as a burning issue and expressed satisfaction with the way the Modi government responded to the terror attack in Pulwama. Most of them did not talk about employment opportunities or the lack of it. This is also partly true because most first-time voters are yet to enter the job market. "I will support Narendra Modi because he can take hard decisions, such as demonetisation and the surgical strikes," says 18-year-old college student Harsh Verma from Lucknow. Harshita Gupta, 19, who is pursuing commerce from Delhi's Hansraj College, seconds the view: "I'm impressed with the way Prime Minister Narendra Modi responded to the Pakistan-sponsored terror attack."

It's this Modi image of strength and decisiveness that the BJP expects to hardsell to the youngest members of the electorate. A recent survey by a media group indicates that the BJP's plan to pitch the Lok Sabha campaign as a 'vote for Modi' may yield dividend. According to the survey, when it comes to voting for a party, only 18 per cent of the male respondents and 10 per cent of the female respondents give a thought to the local candidate in the fray. Modi's personal charisma evokes excitement even among voters who have been beneficiaries of the welfare schemes rolled by non-BJP state governments. Take the case of 19-year-old Moumita Das, a first year physical education student of Vivekananda Mahavidyalaya in Hooghly, West Bengal. She is a recipient of the Mamata Banerjee-led Trinamool Congress (TMC) government's Kanyashree award, which earned her Rs 25,000 as a one-time grant to pursue her career. She also got a bicycle from the state government. The politically conscious girl, who follows news through newspapers and TV channels, doesn't want to reveal her voting choice, but cannot hide her enthusiasm when asked about Modi. "I like him. He's done good for the country and also for all of us," says Das. That is the reason why all of the BJP's youth outreach programmes revolve around Modi.

In January, the BJP launched the Modi Yuva Shakti campaign in Mumbai to seek the support of young voters for the prime minister. The aim is to propagate Modi's vision of growth and development in nearly 60 colleges in Mumbai. The Bharatiya Janata Yuva Morcha (BJYM) has launched a 'Pledge for Narendra Modi' campaign-conceptualised around young voters affirming support for Modi by giving a missed call on specified numbers-as well as appointed 'NaMo Yuva volunteers' in colleges across the country. "We are receiving 50,000 missed calls every day from first-time voters. The number of NaMo Yuva volunteers is expected to touch 5 million by the time of the election," claims Poonam Mahajan, BJP MP and president of the BJYM.

The BJP youth wing has been running awareness campaigns on voter registration through posters based on characters and dialogues from Bollywood movies. One such poster based on a popular dialogue from the movie Dabangg reads: 'Thappad se darr nahin lagta, voter ID na hone se lagta hai (Not scared of being slapped, scared of not having a voter ID)'. The BJYM is the only youth wing of a political party to have a verified presence on Snapchat. On January 17, it launched the Vijay Lakshya 2019 campaign from Tawang in Arunachal Pradesh to take the achievements of the Modi government to the country's remote corners. Mahajan has addressed an estimated 100,000 first-time voters across 200 districts. The Akhil Bharatiya Vidyarthi Parishad (ABVP), the BJP's students' wing, has launched a widespread campaign in universities in Bihar, Uttar Pradesh, Madhya Pradesh and down South. The IT cell of the BJP has launched the 'Millennium Vote Campaign' through an app to help first-time voters register to vote.

Not that everyone is getting swayed by the BJP's narrative woven around national security. For scores of young minds, issues of equal concern are the amenities they can expect from the government. "No doubt, corruption and national security are important, but I would vote for a party that ensures better internet speed and sets up more casual meeting points in Mumbai," says Sagar Yadav, a student of arts from the city's Bhandup suburb. Lakshya Bhaskar, a 19-year-old medical student in Jaipur, says: "I will vote for the Congress because the BJP did nothing to set up a medical college in Jhunjhunu, my home district."

CHALLENGES FOR THE CONGRESS

Hoping that such localised disgruntlement and not a larger national agenda will emerge as the decisive factor for many young voters, the Congress is playing catch-up. If the BJP launched the 'Mera Pehla Vote Modi Ko' campaign in UP, the Maharashtra unit of the Congress ran the 'First Vote for Nation' campaign, wherein party workers reached out to some 250,000 first-time voters across the state. Since taking charge as Congress president in December 2017, Rahul has been constantly talking about connecting with the youth-from announcing at the Congress plenary that he would keep the stage empty for youngsters to his 'Apni Baat Rahul Ke Saath' dialogue with young students. Even Priyanka Gandhi, during her travel in UP, held several meetings with young students. The Congress is aiming to register 1 million young voters as members before the Lok Sabha election. From teaching English to young boys and girls in the remote areas to helping students get college admissions to looking into the safety of northeastern girls in the metros, the party is going all-out to attract first-time voters.

The Youth Congress's 'Yuva Kranti Yatra', which raised issues concerning the youth, minorities and Dalits and highlighted the Modi government's failures, crisscrossed 25 states over a month and a half, ending in January. A campaign-'I Am India'-has also been designed to counter the BJP's idea of a uniform India and to tap the resentment over issues such as caste violence and the ban on beef. The goal is to present the vision of a liberal India where citizens are not questioned over their choices of food, dress, practices and culture. "I will vote for a candidate who assures my freedom to dress the way I want, eat what I want and be on the street whenever I want," says Manasi Thakkar, a student from Mumbai's Borivali area.

This narrative seems to have found greater appeal in regions witnessing conflicts over cultural and linguistic identities. "The country has had enough of hardcore Hindutva politics. I will vote for the Congress because it can hold the secular flavour of India," says 19-year-old Pratik Deka from Guwahati. Assam has recently witnessed massive protests-mostly led by young people-against the Citizenship (Amendment) Bill, 2016, which sought to provide citizenship to Hindu illegal immigrants from Bangladesh, apart from five other non-Muslim religious groups from Pakistan, Afghanistan and Bangladesh.

Yet, with the general election less than a month away, Rahul has not been able to mobilise his party's youth wings-the Youth Congress and National Students Union of India (NSUI)-quickly enough and in the right direction. This is primarily because of a lack of coordination between the outfits. "The two units presented two different budgets to target the same group of voters. Instead of working in sync, the chiefs of the Youth Congress, NSUI and social media cell rarely communicate with each other," says a Congress general secretary on condition of anonymity. A Rajya Sabha member of the party attributes the "absence of glitz" in the outreach programmes to the financial crisis staring at the Congress since 2014. "We are working silently without the marketing gimmick that Modi employs," he says.

SUCH ORGANISATIONAL HICCUPS notwithstanding, the Congress has conducted several surveys to try and gauge the mind of the young voter and has also been taking regular feedback from party workers through its Shakti app. "There is huge discontent among the youth, particularly in the rural areas, against the Modi government," claims Praveen Chakravarty, head of the Congress data analytics team. "No new jobs have been created while demonetisation destroyed millions of jobs. Thanks to our research, we know what the youth of India is thinking." His party boss insists that the Congress knows how to fix India's rising unemployment problem. "There's a serious job crisis in India, but Narendra Modi doesn't have any strategy to tackle it. The Congress will show how to create employment," Rahul told INDIA TODAY.

While Chakravarty's team has been busy giving inputs and packaging Rahul's message to attract the youth, Congress veterans are taking Modi head-on. In his Republic Day address this year, Madhya Pradesh chief minister Kamal Nath announced the 'Yuva Swabhiman Yojana' for the urban youth from the economically weaker sections. "Under this scheme, 100 days of employment will be provided to the youth. They will also be imparted skills training," says Nath. The Congress stalwart from MP understands that the Modi government's January announcement-a month after the BJP lost assembly elections in the Hindi heartland states of Rajasthan, MP and Chhattisgarh-of 10 per cent reservation in jobs and education for the economically weaker sections in the general category found resonance with poor young men and women from upper castes. Like 20-year-old Ashish Kumar Prajapati, a BSc student from the state's Bhopal district, who says: "I will vote for the BJP because of the 10 per cent reservation for economically weaker general candidates. I would be a beneficiary."

The decision to offer 10 per cent reservation is also the consequence of a growing recognition among the BJP brass that jobs remain the youth's prime concern. The National Sample Survey Office (NSSO) report, which says joblessness in India was at a 45-year high of 6.1 per cent in 2017-18, couldn't have come at a worse time, threatening to upset Modi's grand plan of wooing new young voters. In a high-powered committee meeting headed by home minister Rajnath Singh in March, several members raised the issue of unemployment and deliberated over a plan to convince voters that the BJP will generate more jobs if it is returned to power. "We may be talking about job creation in the informal sector. But the Indian youth still wants a government job," says a Union minister involved in preparing the BJP's Lok Sabha poll manifesto. "I have recently travelled from the Northeast to Himachal Pradesh to Kerala. All young men asked me how they could get a government job." A youth survey published in 2017 had 65 per cent of the over 6,000 respondents expressing a preference for a government job.

THE REGIONAL CONTENDERS

Not just the BJP and Congress, the regional players, too, have woken up to this new vote bloc. The youth wing of the Nationalist Congress Party (NCP) has run awareness campaigns in around 100 Maharashtra colleges, appealing to first-time voters to exercise their franchise. The Bahujan Samaj Party (BSP) has been using social media for the first time to inform and educate the youth about Dalit icons. The party doesn't fail to mention that nine of its 19 MLAs in Uttar Pradesh are under the age of 40. The Samajwadi Party (SP) hopes its young leadership-45-year-old president Akhilesh Yadav and his 41-year-old wife Dimple, who will contest the Lok Sabha election-will appeal to the young voter. The party also held a statewide enrolment drive at the booth level.

Aditya Thackeray, the young Shiv Sena leader, has been active on social media, often raising youth-centric issues. Recently, the party announced a contest among college students in Mumbai to encourage enrolment among new voters. TMC Rajya Sabha MP Derek O'Brien has conceptualised a quiz contest for West Bengal's students regarding the welfare schemes of the Mamata Banerjee government. Mamata has also launched a membership drive for the TMC's student and youth wings. She is eyeing a 100 per cent jump in membership before the Lok Sabha election-to 5 million. In the Rashtriya Janata Dal (RJD), Sanjay Yadav, a 35-year-old MBA from Haryana, and another close friend of Tejashwi Yadav have been overseeing the youth outreach programmes. Former election strategist Prashant Kishor, who is now Janata Dal (United) vice-president, will oversee the drive to woo first-time voters in Bihar for his party and ally BJP.

The challenge for parties, though, is the range and complexity of issues concerning the youth. For instance, in rural Rajasthan, Pooja Kanwar and Sanju Kanwar-both 18 and married-wish to vote for the BJP because their loans were waived, they got cooking gas connections and smartphones with free data to video-chat with their parents. In West Bengal, 18-year-old BSc student Rima Pramanik says she will vote for the TMC because it gave her mother a job and helped fund her father's treatment as well as her higher studies.

It's not just Mamata Banerjee's Kanyashree, a conditional cash transfer scheme to incentivise education of teenage girls, other state governments have also launched schemes to target the young: from the Naveen Patnaik-led BJD government's 'Mu Hero, Mu Odisha' (I am Hero-I am Odisha) programme, aimed at giving recognition to young achievers in the state, to Telangana chief minister K. Chandrashekar Rao's pre-election promise of a monthly unemployment allowance of Rs 3,016, to Andhra Pradesh chief minister N. Chandrababu Naidu's 'Mukhya Mantri-Yuva Nestham' scheme, which offers a monthly allowance of Rs 1,000 to unemployed youth. The Modi government, too, has tailored several schemes for the education and livelihood of the youth-Beti Bachao Beti Padhao, Pradhan Mantri MUDRA Yojana, Digital India, Skill India, Startup India, Pradhan Mantri Rojgar Protsahan Yojana and the Pradhan Mantri Yuva Udyamita Vikas Abhiyan.

Multiple factors, such as caste and family pressure, determine voting choices in rural India. There is, however, a growing assessment among political parties that caste as a factor is on the decline. "Caste-based parties are shrinking. Had that not been the case, the BJP would not have got a massive mandate in UP in the 2014 Lok Sabha and 2017 assembly elections," reasons BJP national general secretary Ram Madhav. The Congress's Chakravarty agrees: "Economics drives electoral decisions in today's India, even in the rural areas."

When it comes to the prime ministerial choice, the youth seem to reflect the national mood. When INDIA TODAY correspondents interviewed 20 first-time voters from 10 states, Modi found supporters everywhere, barring Kerala. Rahul was the preferred choice in Kerala and Telangana while Mamata and Nitish Kumar were preferred in their native states.

Though the 2014 Lok Sabha election uniquely had first-time voters clocking a higher turnout than the average voter-a repeat of the trend in 2019 cannot be assumed. Politics is still a no-go zone for a majority of the country's youth-a 2017 survey by CSDS, in association with the Konrad-Adenauer-Stiftung (KAS), showed that 46 per cent young respondents had no interest in politics. Despite awareness campaigns, few young voters know they can get enrolled for voting in the city where they are pursuing their education provided they present relevant educational documents.

In 2017, the EC collaborated with Facebook to start sending 'voter registration reminders' to eligible voters. The reminder, sent in 13 Indian languages, intended to drive first-time voters to the national voters' services portal, which would guide them through the registration process. Nearly 23 per cent of Facebook users in India are in the 18-23 age bracket. Now, Google has started sending such prompts to Android users. The EC has also started organising voter enrolment programmes in colleges by appointing teachers as campus ambassadors. In January, the EC launched Electoral Literacy Clubs in Mumbai. Some 2,500 educational institutions have set up such clubs.

As the country gears up for the mother of all electoral battles, multiple baits will be thrown at the millennial voter-from the BJP's nationalistic agenda to the Congress's message of inclusiveness and promise of jobs. In all of this lies a welcome change-the youth is increasingly becoming the focal point of the Indian election.

- with inputs from Rohit Parihar, Kiran D Tare, Amarnath K. Menon, Jeemon Jacob, Rahul Noronha, Romita Datta, Amitabh Srivastava, Ashish Misra and Sukant Deepak
