With the death of Okwui Enwezor, Indian art has lost a sympathetic eye

He had a dramatic effect on ‘art’ as social constituency

It is a condition of post-colony that for much of the last century, the path between India and Africa was seen through the twin lens of America and Europe. Nevertheless, individuals opened a shared and a frequently contested perspective: Nelson Mandela in politics, Chinua Achebe, Frantz Fanon, and Ben Okri, among others, in literature; and in the arts, most prominently, critic and curator Okwui Enwezor. With the death of Enwezor last week, aged 55, Indian art has lost a sympathetic interpreter.

Born in Calabar, Nigeria, and located between Europe and the U.S. — his last assignment was as the head of the Haus der Kunst, Munich. Enwezor had an extraordinary revolving door presence: even as he was funded and appointed by premier Western institutions, he challenged Eurocentricism, and gathered the art of the global south in a colossal and confident embrace. This stands out as a singular achievement because the attempts that preceded him to ‘map’ the margins, so to speak, were either awkward and botched, or inconsequential.

Afro-pessimism

I recall walking into International Center of Photography Museum in New York in 2006, wondering at the scope of an exhibition curated by Enwezor that addressed ‘New Positions in Contemporary African Photography’. It had followed an exhibition a decade ago titled ‘In/Sight: African Photographers 1940 to the Present’, which he had curated for the Guggenheim. But a continent in a gallery? Yet this is precisely what Enwezor succeeded in doing, in an extremely ambitious curation that plucked Africa out of the narrative of ‘Afro-pessimism’ and instead presented an unsentimental, complex view of an unfolding social history.

As a curator, Enwezor’s style was emphatic and exploratory without being ‘stagey’. As a political science student in New York, he had turned to art criticism, based on his passion for art. The facility to articulate his ideas of post-colonialism and inclusivity rendered his position even more compelling. His curation of the 2015 Venice Biennale, for instance, was titled ‘All the World’s Futures’, in which he stepped closer to the idea of staging a massive exhibition in the mode of a multi-durational performance. He specifically invited artists, filmmakers, writers, choreographers, to use a performative mode. Isaac Julien’s direction of actors reading from Marx’s Das Kapital, for instance, lasted over seven months.

Much of Enwezor’s reputation as a curator with an encyclopaedic vision rested on his extraordinary intervention with documenta 11 2002. By throwing open the gates of Kassel, a small Eurocentric arts centre, to groups and artists from Congo, Senegal, Dakar, and yes, India; in bringing in not just artists but anthropologists, historians, social scientists, writers and filmmakers, he had a dramatic effect on ‘art’ as social constituency. Perhaps what worked was that Enwezor had never trained in curating or art history. With a background in political science, he raised the politics of colonisation, race and global economy, as primary filter to the event. Enwezor also used a kind of distributive model, bringing in a team of curators, especially influential in the ‘platforms’ devised on issues of ‘truth and reconciliation’, to lead up to the documenta. Not everyone, particularly in Europe, was enthused. Artists accused Enwezor of putting theory above art works, and German art critic Thomas Wagner said, “the process is clear: the seminar comes first, the art comes next.”

Alternative discourse

However, this was already the early 2000s. The exhaustion with the art gallery system had created alternative practices and spaces. And Enwezor’s example provided an alternative curatorial discourse. What followed was sometimes drowned in an excess of critical theory, but it nevertheless provided a huge impetus to art in the global south. The prickly memory of exhibitions like Magiciens de la terre (1989) was allowed to rest.

If, as it appeared, the impetus that subaltern studies had given to literature and the social sciences passed fulsomely into art, then Enwezor was at the centre of this change. Enwezor was able to carry the same sentiment to the Venice Biennale, albeit with less success. With regard to India, Enwezor in a sense catapulted three artists to the world stage with documenta 11: Raqs Media Collective, Ravi Agarwal and Amar Kanwar, all media practitioners who gained a platform for an engagement with social issues. What he had succeeded in doing with mapping African photography had an echo closer home.

For us, what would be the distant legacy of a figure like Enwezor? Perhaps one would be an active reconsideration of the somewhat stilted India-Africa cultural exchange. In the last 50 years, India has not articulated a culture policy for Africa, and the latter has swung between installing — and uninstalling — statues of Gandhi. (In contrast, China sends over 250 cultural delegations annually to Africa.) Enwezor warned against creating a fetish for Africa as a “site of deep knowledge”. There is, however, abundant possibility for contemporary exchange that could be mutually enriching.

The writer is an art critic and curator who runs www.criticalcollective.in.
