Vivaana bags the prestigious "Best Heritage Hotel" award at SATTE 2019

Rajasthan is one of the most vibrant states in the country drawing huge number of domestic and international tourists.

Located just 240 kms from Delhi and 160 kms from Jaipur, is Vivaana Culture Hotel in a Rajasthani village of Churiajitgarh that breaks away from the usual and makes for a perfect weekend getaway.

Having carved a distinct niche for itself in the heritage hospitality segment, Vivaana, a meticulously restored 19th century Shekhawati Haveli in Churi Ajitgarh, Mandawa, Rajasthan was bestowed with the prestigious "Best Heritage Hotel" award at the III edition of the SATTE Awards 2019. Atul Khanna and Devna Khanna - the Directors of Vivaana Culture Hotel were present at the awards ceremony to receive the award for their dream project brought to life.

Vivaana is situated in the Shekhawati region which is also known as the "Open Art Gallery" because of the elaborate and intricate frescos in the Havelis of the region. Vivaana is one of the gems, whose walls boast of beautiful frescoes that are a glimpse of Indian culture and heritage.

"We are delighted to receive this prestigious award for Vivaana. It is a 'True Restoration by Heart' as it was conceived with a lot of passion and dedication to offer a lifetime experience to travellers in an ambience reflecting the old world charm and splendour of the bygone era", said Atul Khanna, heritage lover and conservationist at heart.

"Rajasthan is truly a destination of grand Havelis which are beautifully crafted with delicate artwork and have stood against the vagaries of nature. The entire process of restoring Vivaana has been quite enlivening and inspiring though a daunting process. Hence the onus is on us to restore it especially in the wake of this falling prey to commercial lucre and greed. We appeal to entrepreneurs to incorporate these in their models, archaeological departments to take ownership and a native to be proud of these ageless wonders", added Khanna, reiterating the need to conserve heritage monuments.

With a paradigm shift taking place in the travel industry, heritage hotels have been gaining importance lately as travellers want to experience the age-old era of glorious past of dynasties that lived in these beautifully crafted and designed mansions.

Heritage hotels have been the catalyst for the growth of tourism in many states and the conversion of heritage structures into revenue-generating hospitality units have directly or indirectly helped the conservation of these structures. While these structures become self-sustaining units, they also provide employment opportunities to the local people.

This story is provided by NewsVoir. ANI will not be responsible in any way for the content of this article.

(This story has not been edited by Business Standard staff and is auto-generated from a syndicated feed.)
