Inside story of what happened in the Select Committee that shunted CBI Director Alok Verma

There were eight charges against CBI Director Alok Verma (above) in the CVC report presented before the high-powered select committee. (Photo: PTI)

Within 24 hours of getting his job back as the CBI director, Alok Verma was out of it. Following the Supreme Court order that reinstated him on Tuesday (January 8), a high-powered selection panel headed by Prime Minister Narendra Modi on Thursday found merit in the recommendation and charges of the CVC against Verma and decided that he should not continue as the head of the premier agency.

Alok Verma, a 1979-batch AGMUT cadre IPS officer, was shunted out of the post on charges of corruption and dereliction of duty.

The removal was not without politics and acrimony. The Supreme Court had faulted the manner in which Verma was sent on leave on the basis of the CVC recommendation on October 23 last year and asked the three-member panel with PM, CJI and Congress leader in Lok Sabha Mallikarjun Kharge as members.

CJI Ranjan Gogoi had "recused" from the committee as he had heard Kharge's petition challenging Verma's removal and nominated second-in-command in the SC Justice AK Sikri to attend the mandated meeting.

There were eight charges against Verma in the CVC report presented before the committee.

The panel had held its first meeting on Wednesday. But the meeting ended without any conclusion. When the committee met on Thursday, the order of the CVC was recirculated.

Sources said that during the meeting, Justice Sikri is said to have stated that there are charges against Verma. To this, Kharge is said to have replied "where are the charges".

Following this, the PM and Justice Sikri are said to have said yes to removing Verma. But Kharge submitted a dissent note stating that there was "lack of substantial findings against Alok Verma in the CVC report and that he should be allowed an unfettered run as the CBI director".

Government sources claimed that Kharge indulged in impropriety by not recusing from the meeting despite being a petitioner in the court with a vested legal interest.

The BJP termed the verdict of the committee as vindication of the October move by the government to send Verma on leave.

Verma has been posted as director general, fire and services, civil defence and home guards for the residual period of his present term which ends on January 31. Meanwhile, M Nageshwar Rao got back the post till the appointment of a new director.

Alarm bells went ringing in the government as Verma swiftly took charge of the agency after 75 days reversing all transfers carried out after his ouster.

The most significant one being reinstating the officers who were heading the probe against CBI's number 2 officer Rakesh Asthana. Government feared that Verma may move ahead with search warrants against Asthana and may be even arrest him.

POLITICAL OUTCOMES

For the Congress, this is the second setback in a major political charge against the PM after the Supreme Court order on the Rafale deal.

Stung by the setback in the high-powered committee, the Congress came all guns blazing at the Modi government.

Kharge told India Today TV that from the beginning the "proceedings of the meeting were premeditated". The Congress fielded its deputy leader of Rajya Sabha Anand Sharma to attack the government.

When asked about Kharge indirectly pointing fingers at Justice Sikri who was part of the committee, senior Congress leader Abhishek Manu Singhvi said, "Justice Sikri was in the committee as a nominee of the CJI and not as a judge."

On the other hand, the BJP too unleashed a political counter. In a tweet Railways minister Piyush Goyal said: "Indeed, Mr Mallikarjun Kharge is a man of amazing consistency. When Alok Verma was appointed CBI chief by the selection committee, he dissented. Now, when Alok Verma has been removed by the same selection committee, he has dissented."

Indeed, Mr. Mallikarjun Kharge is a man of amazing consistency.



When Shri Alok Verma was appointed CBI chief by the selection committee, he dissented.



Now, when Shri Alok Verma has been removed by the same Selection Committee, he has dissented. — Piyush Goyal (@PiyushGoyal) January 10, 2019

The Congress in response tweeted from its official Twitter handle: "By removing Alok Verma from his position without giving him the chance to present his case, PM Modi has shown once again that he's too afraid of an investigation, either by an independent CBI director or by Parliament via JPC."

By removing #AlokVerma from his position without giving him the chance to present his case, PM Modi has shown once again that he's too afraid of an investigation, either by an independent CBI director or by Parliament via JPC. — Congress (@INCIndia) January 10, 2019

The war over CBI has now spread like a wildfire. So far, in a first, a CBI director has been removed, re-instated and then again removed within three months.

The challenge ahead for the Modi government is that the new CBI director can be appointed only by the high-powered selection committee and Kharge is a key member in it.

With the Congress and BJP openly at loggerheads, it is unlikely that Congress (and hence Kharge) will agree to any name proposed by the government.

This paves way for more political drama and uncertainty over the country's premier investigating agency in the coming days.

ALSO READ | Alok Verma removed as CBI chief by Modi-led panel, made fire services chief

ALSO READ | PM Modi should not listen to bogus brains, Alok Verma can't be sacked: Swamy

ALSO WATCH | Alok Verma sacked: Removed CBI boss may face CBI probe, say sources
