Runway of change

Designer Tarun Tahiliani’s Egypt-inspired collection travels to Chennai, but for a cause

This time last year, Tarun Tahiliani was in Egypt, floating down the Nile.

“I was struck by the gold, the architecture, the hieroglyphics in the Valley of the Kings, the drape of their ivory linen fabrics — all of which resonated with my design philosophy,” he says, over a patchy phone call from the outskirts of Delhi.

His innumerable sketches and photographs gradually coalesced into the ‘India by the Nile’ Spring Summer ’19 collection, pieces of which he will be bringing down as part of a fundraiser showcase at the ITC Grand Chola next Saturday.

The designer, who gave his nod for the Madras Round Table 1 (MRT1) event — which aims to raise funds for its “Keep Them in School” campaign — “as a favour to my friend Sindoori Reddy (the COO of Apollo Hospitals, Southern Region)”, says it is also a cause that is close to his heart. His father was “heavily involved” with education.

Tarun Tahiliani | Photo Credit: Special Arrangement

“It’s a good way to use fashion. It gets people into a room, they listen, they donate. The only thing you need to ensure, and Shabana Azmi taught me this, is that you’ve to keep your cost down and ensure all the money goes to the cause. Very often, people have a big party and there is nothing left,” he says.

Touch of exotic

At the show, Tahiliani will unveil 75 pieces, culled from his couture and occasion wear line, In Elysium, and his SS19 collection.

“In Elysium is all about hand-embroidery on natural Indian fabrics (think hand appliquéd tulle lehengas and sheer blouses), while India by the Nile is more dramatic, with our liquid gold jersey drape with lycra and beads being a highlight,” he says.

Into the classroom “Throughout the year, MRT1 works with government schools and hospitals,” says Tarun Reddy, the chairman. “Two years ago, we helped Mahesh Memorial Trust build another floor for their paediatric cancer block, and last year, we assisted The Spastic Society of Tamil Nadu with their space for physiotherapy and related works.”

This year, the charitable organisation is looking to help five schools: the Government Girls Schools at Avadi and Perambur, Panchayat Union School (Thoraipakkam), Adi Dravidar School (Kolappancheri), and Lady NYE HSS (Taramani). “They have high pass percentages, in the upper 85% to 90%, but bad facilities and things like lack of furniture are keeping some students away.” With 100% of funds raised from the Tahiliani show going towards “helping the schools get what they need”, Tarun adds that work will commence on the various projects by the second week of April.

Also keep an eye out for draped cocktail dresses and the iconic Pharaonic necklace — that traditionally comes studded with lapis lazuli, turquoise, coral and carnelians — on jewelled tees and pre-draped saris.

Of course, the designer who dressed American talk show host Oprah Winfrey in an orange-and-gold kanjeevaram sari during her 2012 India visit, can’t visit the city without showcasing his take on the silk weave.

“Who knows kanjeevaram better than Chennai? Rather than saris, I’ll be bringing down beautifully-draped, corseted lehengas, dhotis, etc,” he says, adding that his designs have also addressed the stiffness that many young women dislike in the brocade. “We’ve learnt how to take the ‘kanji’ (starch) out of kanjeevaram, and make it more malleable. We’ll show some of those, too.”

Grand finale

Tahiliani, who has been retailing at Collage for years, feels that his ready-to-wear designs sell best in Chennai. But he quickly states that he has a long list of couture clients, too, who often visit him in Delhi.

‘India by the Nile’ collection by Tarun Tahiliani | Photo Credit: Special Arrangement

“Sindoori was the first Reddy girl I did a lehenga for, when she got married,” he reminisces, adding that nowadays many South Indian grooms visit his stores to try on pre-draped dhotis. “We also have a fantastic surprise at the show. It will be interspersed with kathak dancer Manjari Chaturvedi’s performance,” he concludes.

For donor passes, call 9840578326, 9840783269. The invite-only event is on March 30, at 8 pm, at the ITC Grand Chola.
