MGP expels Lavu Mamledar for indiscipline, anti-party activities

NT NETWORK

PANAJI

The Maharashtrawadi Gomantak Party (MGP) Saturday expelled general secretary and former MGP MLA Lavu Mamledar from the party for six years for gross breach of discipline.

The decision on Mamledar’s expulsion was taken at an executive committee meeting held on Saturday after majority of eight members of the 15-member central committee voted in favour of the decision.

The decision had become imminent after Mamledar wrote a letter on Friday to Speaker of the state assembly and Governor, asking them not to consider any official communication from the party members other than that of the general secretary, who has been solely authorised by the party.

Supporters of MGP gathered at the party office in St Inez, raised slogans against Mamledar and booed him

for ignoring the party leadership.

Addressing a press conference, MGP president Deepak Dhavalikar said the expulsion followed Lavu’s activities that were against the policies and principles of the organisation. “Lavu’s acting was suspicious. He kept crucial documents like cheque books and other correspondence at home. We have been tolerating his indiscipline and behaviour for the past one and half year but we didn’t react harshly and gave him an opportunity to improve and reform, but he failed,” said Dhavalikar.

“Since Mamledar was adamant on his stand despite committee members trying to persuade him for two hours during the central committee meeting, it was resolved to expel him for six years for anti-party activities and indiscipline. The party has given his charge to joint secretary Pratap Phadte,” the MGP president said.

“The decision of the central committee on expulsion will be placed before the general body meeting on April 30 for approval.

Mamledar had no right to write such a letter to Speaker or Governor,

and there was no resolution passed by the central committee to authenticate the letter,” Dhavalikar said.

He also warned of similar action against party members for challenging the top leadership. “We have also decided that henceforth any official communication and correspondence sent to legislative body, Governor or Election Commission of India will require prior approval of the party president and acknowledgment from all the committee members,” he said.
