Serving officials rage over Defence ministry's stand on Non Functional Upgrade

At a time when the armed forces are grappling with accommodation shortage, the Ministry of Defence (MoD's) stand that Non Functional Upgrade (NFU) should not be extended to the military because officers have palatial houses has sparked rage among serving officials as well as veterans.

While the reference to "palatial houses" has not been made in the written reply by MoD, but sources said it was mentioned during verbal arguments in the court.

Government's opposition for denying NFU is that armed forces have several facilities and privileges that other services don't get, including certain special allowances.

"The government is also of the view that armed forces have a different functional structure that will break down if NFU is granted," said an official privy to the details.

Several former officers took to Twitter over the last few days posting pictures of their bunkers and humble dwellings calling them their palatial homes mocking at the government's stand.

"I am apolitical and always give credit where due. But who is heading the government which allows MoD to deny NFU to armed forces and challenge AFT ruling in Supreme Court," former Army Chief V P Malik wrote on Twitter.

Civilian officers of Grade 'A' services are entitled to NFU financially upgrading them to the same pay scale two years after their contemporary Indian Administrative Service (IAS) batch gets empanelled at the Centre.

So there might be several officers from Group A Services who might not have reached the level of secretary in the government of India but will retire will be put in the Higher Administrative Grade (HAG) and get salary and pension much higher than their functional positions actually held.

"This was my #palatial bungalow while I was deployed on LoC. July month. River bed. AC (air use to flow on conditions ) 48° during the day. Regular visitor: Cat sized Rats. Seven-course meal buffet. Kitchen use to open to enemy fire inspection. Do I deserve #NFU Naah. No way," wrote Major D P Singh posting pictures.

This was my #palatial bungalow while I was deployed on LoC.

July month.

River bed.

AC(air use 2flow on conditions)48° during day.

Regular visitor:Cat sized Rats.

7course meal buffet. Kitchen use 2open2 enemy fire inspection.



Do I deserve #NFU

Naah. No way.@Warrior_Mukul pic.twitter.com/ITjG0gOQUQ Major D P Singh (@MajDPSingh) March 16, 2019





Twitter is raging about NFU and palatial house of an Indian Airforce Officer. Many of the best fighter pilots would have stayed here and will continue to stay. Obviously, they do not deserve NFU.

While the view within the serving officers on the NFU is split, there is near unanimity that there was no need for the government to give bizarre reasoning like "palatial homes" for denying it.

The Armed Forces have been demanding the grant of NFU based on recommendations of the Central Pay Commission like the Grade 'A' Services and even the Central Armed Police Forces now to have parity in pay scales.

Services under MoD that get NFU, creating pay disparity, include Indian Police Service (IPS) working in Central Armed Police Forces (CAPFs), Indian Naval Armament Service, Indian Ordnance Factory Service, Indian Defence Services of Engineers, Border Roads Organisation, Defence Research and Development Service, Defence Quality Assurance Service and Defence Aeronautical Quality Assurance Service.

NFU was granted to 49 'Organised Group A Services' but in 2010, it was extended to the All India Services--- including the IPS and the Indian Forest Service. Over the years, it has been extended to 63 Group A services.

From 2008, IPS officers were also brought under the ambit of NFU. The armed forces have maintained that this created command problems in border areas or counter-terror operations where IPS officers are serving alongside as part of CAPFs such as Border Security Force (BSF) and Central Reserve Police Force (CRPF).

There could be a situation when Brigadier is drawing less salary compared to an IPS officer serving alongside, who otherwise could be junior or of the same level.

The government challenged the Armed Forces Tribunal (AFT) order granting NFU but the hearing in Supreme Court has got delayed because even after two years the government failed to serve notices to certain respondents who are serving officers and were part of the petition in AFT.
