Pawan Kalyan Is A Chameleon With Double Standards: Botsa Satyanarayana

Hyderabad: Senior YSR Congress Party (YSRCP) leader Botsa Satyanarayana criticised the double standards of Jana Sena Party (JSP) chief Pawan Kalyan.

Speaking to the media at the YSRCP Central office on Saturday, Botsa said while Chandrababu Naidu was making casteist and regional comments that could create public unrest, Pawan Kalyan was trying to lead the people's minds in wrong directions.

Referring to his comments at a public rally recently , Botsa said that Pawan Kalyan was making distasteful remarks while campaigning and that Pawan was setting a new trend in politics by pretending to be in the opposition , but was not raising his voice against the ruling party regime.

Pawan Kalyan has entered into a secret pact with the ruling party and is indirectly supporting the TDP, he said. Botsa found fault with the statements Pawan made at the Bhimavaram rally that Telangana Chief Minister K Chandrasekhar Rao (KCR) was grabbing lands that belonged to the Andhra people .

Calling Pawan Kalyan a chameleon , Botsa said that Pawan was making different statements and indulging in egocentric politics. When KCR won the Telangana elections, Pawan had praised him to the skies and now he was making irresponsible and negative statements about the same person, he criticised.

Botsa went on add that Pawan Kalyan's brother Nagababu had also praised KCR and that he had voted for the TRS as well which had won with a thumping majority. Nagababu claimed that his vote was important and had even congratulated KCR on his win with support from the public.

Botsa read out the statements made by Nagababu praising KCR, HarishRao and K T Rama Rao. Now in the presence of his brother Nagababu, Pawan Kalyan is criticising the TRS leader, which is proof of his double standards , Botsa reiterated.

“It was wrong to state that the TRS and YSRCP had colluded. YRSCP has no pact with the TRS .Pawan Kalyan’s statements are extremely regional in nature and can incite riots and people should be cautious not to fall for such statements by him ,” Botsa said.

Why wasn't Pawan questioning the ruling government’s inaction on the murder of YSRCP leader YS Vivekananda Reddy, Botsa wondered. How could he criticise the opposition about the murder and not the ruling party regime about this ,he demanded to know.

The people of Andhra Pradesh have to carefully examine the statements he has made, Botsa cautioned.

Does Pawan have the guts to question the ruling party about their mistakes and atrocities, Botsa asked. He said that the YS Vivekananda's daughter and the family were in deep grief and she had also asked as to why the opposition was politicising the issue.

She has also approached the Election Commission and the Central Home Ministry regarding this, he said. Doesn't the Jana Sena leader have the responsibility of questioning the ruling party regime about this incident, he asked.

Though the AP police were capable Chandrababu was trying to dilute the case investigation , he remarked.

Botsa said that April 11 was the last day for Chandrababu Naidu in office and after that he and the TDP would have to shut shop.

Botsa Satyanarayana said that the people of Andhra Pradesh should give YSRCP a chance and if they come to power the party under YS Jagan's leadership would mean all round development of the state, he concluded.

Also Read: Pawan Contesting From Two Seats To Avoid Humiliation From Defeat
