Indian government's pledge to fight tuberculosis gives experts hope

A woman creates a Rangoli art pattern with a message to end TB on it during an event held by the Indian Department of Health and Family welfare to promote awareness about tuberculosis on the occasion of World Tuberculosis Day in Palampur, India, Mar. 24, 2019. EPA-EFE/SANJAY BAID

A girl shows her painted face with a message to stop TB, during an event held by the Indian Department of Health and Family welfare to promote awareness about tuberculosis on the occasion of World Tuberculosis Day in Palampur, India, Mar. 24, 2019. EPA-EFE/SANJAY BAID

A student holds a poster while giving a presentation during an event held by the Indian Department of Health and Family welfare to promote awareness about tuberculosis on the occasion of World Tuberculosis Day in Palampur, India, Mar. 24, 2019. EPA-EFE/SANJAY BAID

A woman creates a Rangoli art pattern with a message to end TB on it during an event held by the Indian Department of Health and Family welfare to promote awareness about tuberculosis on the occasion of World Tuberculosis Day in Palampur, India, Mar. 24, 2019. EPA-EFE/SANJAY BAID

The prime minister of India – a country that accounted for roughly one-fourth of the around 10 million tuberculosis cases registered worldwide in 2014 – has vowed to fight the disease, raising hopes among experts despite concerns about the lack of concrete plans and a heavy focus on the private sector.

As the planet celebrated World Tuberculosis Day on Sunday to promote awareness about the infectious disease (which causes more deaths than any other malady in the world), a decline in the number of cases in India would represent great progress, Dr Paula Fujiwara, the executive director of the International Union Against Tuberculosis and Lung Disease, told EFE.

"I believe India has the resources to do it, it is a political question. If the prime minister of a country, no matter which, says that it is important, it can do it," she said.

The expert said that Indian PM Narendra Modi's pledge last year to end tuberculosis in the country by 2025 was promising.

This time, promises seem to be supported by facts: India quadrupled public spending on efforts to combat the disease between 2016-18, increasing it from $100 million to $458 million, according to World Health Organization data.

However, as in the rest of the world, tuberculosis is associated with a social stigma in India, which, in addition to other factors – such as lack of hygiene and malnutrition – makes treatment and prevention difficult.

Fujiwara said that sometimes patients with AIDS – which is often accompanied by tuberculosis – find it easier to accept their disease than TB patients.

"There are people with AIDS who say 'well, I have AIDS and I live with the disease,'" she said. "But it is not like that with tuberculosis. I have a patient who has both. He can say 'yes, I have AIDS,' but cannot say the same about TB," she added.

In order to fight against the stigma, the Union has been training volunteers from underprivileged communities to go around in slum colonies and remote areas without access to medical services and find infected people.

"We go to these areas, house by house," the head of the project, Subrat Mohanty, told EFE.

The network covers around 30 million people in a country with a crumbling public healthcare system.

India spent only 1.4 percent of its GDP on its healthcare in 2014 according to the World Bank, lagging behind even its relatively-poor neighbors such as Bangladesh.

The idea is also to control treatment, the expert said, since one of the biggest problems in the fight against tuberculosis is that the patients often abandon the six-month-long treatment within weeks, once they start feeling better.

This is the main reason why India accounts for around one-fourth of the cases of multi-drug-resistant TB, which does not respond to common treatments.

Experts have remained cautious about the progress made so far in the fight against the disease, despite the expectations generated by Modi's pledge.

A commission of 37 experts from 13 countries formed by the medical magazine Lancet, in which Fujiwara also participated, urged India to develop a clear plan describing what the government planned to do in a report published on Wednesday.

The commission said that even though it welcomed India's pledge to eliminate tuberculosis by 2025, the country should pay more attention to primary health services and reducing the high cost of drugs, which patients have to pay out of their own pockets.

The Indian government is planning to bank on private healthcare, even though the sector leaves much to be desired when it comes to treating tuberculosis, according to a study cited by the report.

"Only one-third of private practitioners correctly managed tuberculosis when presented with a text-book standardized patient with this disease," the report said.

By David Asta Alares
