Lok Sabha Elections: Key battles to watch out for

(MENAFN- NewsBytes)





Lok Sabha Elections: Key battles to watch out for

24 Mar 2019

India will go to polls from April 11 to decide its future. The battle, which is being touted as "fight for the soul of India" by the Opposition and "fight against dynasty politics" by NDA, will naturally get the attention of the world.

On May 23, we will know India's next Prime Minister.

But before that happens, here's a list of key battles to watch out for.

The Prime Minister is seeking a re-election from Varanasi

Narendra Modi

BJP's biggest bet Prime Minister Narendra Modi is seeking a second term in the office.

Like 2014, he will contest polls from Varanasi, Uttar Pradesh. In the last parliamentary elections, PM Modi defeated AAP Chief Arvind Kejriwal by a margin of over 3 lakh votes.

While it would be foolish to ignore anti-BJP sentiments, PM Modi might just sail through riding on his popularity.

Rahul Gandhi may contest from Amethi and Wayanad

Rahul Gandhi

Congress President Rahul Gandhi has been fielded from UP's Amethi, the constituency which has been sending him to Parliament since he stepped into politics.

Rahul won Amethi in 2014 but the margin wasn't huge. He defeated BJP's Smriti Irani by 1.07 lakh votes.

Along with Amethi, buzz hints that Rahul may also contest from Kerala's Wayanad. KPCC leaders have already made a request for it.

Amit Shah replaced LK Advani in Gandhinagar

Amit Shah

BJP President Amit Shah will venture into Lok Sabha elections for the first time. He has been fielded from Gandhinagar in Gujarat, the seat which sent BJP veteran LK Advani to Lok Sabha six times.

Reports claimed Advani chose to opt out of polls this time owing to his age. But he didn't make an official statement.

Shah's candidature was demanded by BJP workers.

Akhilesh Yadav will contest from father Mulayam's seat

Fact

Samajwadi Party President Akhilesh Yadav will fight polls from Azamgarh, the seat currently held by his father Mulayam Singh Yadav. Azamgarh is seen as an SP bastion considering the sizeable Muslim-Yadav vote bank. Notably, SP gave Mainpuri to the patriarch this time.

As speculated, Digvijaya Singh got the "toughest" seat

Digvijaya Singh

Senior Congress leader Digvijaya Singh, who decided in 2003 that he won't contest polls for 10 years, got one of the "toughest" seats in Madhya Pradesh.

The former CM of MP was given a ticket from Bhopal. Notably, BJP hasn't lost elections in Bhopal in the last 30 years.

The last Congress leader to have won from Bhopal was KN Pradhan in 1984.

Anantnag seat went to Mehbooba Mufti

Mehbooba Mufti

PDP Chief and former J&K CM Mehbooba Mufti will fight polls from Anantnag. Her party has decided to not field candidates in the two Lok Sabha seats of Jammu to ensure "secular" votes aren't divided.

To recall, PDP and BJP formed an alliance in the state but last year the latter dumped it.

Recently, Mufti said she won't ever join hands with BJP again.

Smriti Irani will take on Rahul for the second time

Smriti Irani

Union Minister Smriti Irani has been given a BJP ticket from Amethi. This is the second time the 43-year-old will be locked in a battle with Rahul.

After her name was announced, Irani said the writing on the wall is clear for Rahul.

In the last five years, she has visited the Congress' bastion several times and attacked Rahul relentlessly.
