Samastha trains its guns on Congress

Mushawara member says party neglected Muslims in choice of candidates

The Samastha Kerala Jamiyyathul Ulama, the supreme body of a vast majority Sunni Muslims in the State, has turned its guns on the Congress yet again for giving poor representation for the Muslim community in its choice of candidates.

Samastha Mushawara member Ummer Faizi Mukkam has warned the Congress against continuing its policy of neglecting the community. “The Congress should realise that Muslims are one of the most persecuted communities in the country. And it is sad to see a secular party like the Congress continuing to ignore that community,” Mr. Faizi said.

He urged the Congress to convince the Muslim community if the party’s choices of candidates representing various communities were fair and just. He alleged that the Congress had let down the community in the State for long.

Rahul welcomed

However, Mr. Faizi welcomed the proposal of Congress president Rahul Gandhi contesting from Wayanad. “It is welcome. We will be proud to elect Mr. Gandhi, a symbol of secularism in current India, from Wayanad if he contests from there.”

But he demanded that T. Siddique, if he gives up claim for Wayanad in favour of Mr. Gandhi, be given a seat where victory would be easy. “The Congress leadership should be aware that the Muslim community is extremely under-represented when it comes to choosing candidates in general elections,” he said.

He also warned that the Congress alone would be responsible if the community registered its protest by some means.

Senior Congress leader V.M. Sudheeran said that the Congress had a tradition of not neglecting any community or group. “If there is any grouse, it will certainly be looked into,” he said.

Mr. Sudheeran said that Mr. Gandhi represented the secular India, and that his contesting from Wayanad would be welcome to the Muslim community in the State. “There are no issues without a solution. There is nothing to worry. A wider perspective is needed to assess the issue of community representation. If there is need to expand the representation of the Muslim community, it will be done effectively and carefully,” he said.
