Australia issues travel warning for Indian state after violent Sabarimala temple protests

Kerala has garnered widespread attention after the Supreme Court of India’s verdict late last year that women of menstruating age could legally enter the Sabarimala temple. Women aged between 10-50 were previously denied entry to the temple, which is located at Pathanamthitta district in the southern state of Kerala, as part of a ritual followed by believers for centuries.

The Supreme Court’s verdict allowing women of this age to enter into Sabarimala temple has raised concerns for many. Unrest prevailed in the state following the court verdict when thousands of people, including women, took to the streets to protest the decision.

AAP Image/ EPA/PRAKASH ELAMAKKARA

However, a significant number of women expressed their interest in entering the temple. Having been blocked by thousands of protesting devotees, attempts by women to visit the shrine with police protection were in vain. A couple of months after the verdict, two women below the age of 50 defied this centuries-old ban to enter the temple by walking into the shrine early in the morning this month.

This led to widespread protests across Kerala which later turned into riots. Indian police fired tear gas and used water cannons to disperse a large crowd of protesters who took to the streets, disrupting traffic, pelting stones and burning tyres.

AAP Image/ Sanchit Khanna/Hindustan Times/Sipa USA

Pointing to the violence in various parts of Kerala, the Australian Department of Foreign Affairs and Trade (DFAT) has issued a warning to those visiting the area. DFAT warns travelers to take extra caution and avoid public gatherings while visiting Kerala.

“There have been violent protests in some towns and cities in Kerala over the issue of women accessing the Sabarimala temple," reads the statement. "We expect these protests to continue. If you're in Kerala or due to travel there, monitor local media, be alert and avoid large public gatherings.”

DFAT

DFAT alters the date of travel advisory on a day-to-day basis in analysing the situation.

For more news and information follow SBS Malayalam Facebook Page.
