Palestinian cleric: ‘France will become an Islamic country through jihad’

Palestinian cleric Abu Taqi Al-Din Al-Dari said in an Al-Aqsa mosque address that was uploaded to the Internet on March 12, 2019 that young people in Germany and France do not value marriage as much as Muslims do, but that this is not the reason that France will become an Islamic country. Rather, he explained, France will become an Islamic country through jihad, since Muslims must have a country that will bring Islam’s guidance and message to the West.

He gave examples of times in history when countries in the West and Asia were ruled by the Ottoman Empire, which he described as an Islamic state, and he said that the Islamic nation is capable of “returning to its former self” and spreading Islam. Sheik Taqi Al-Din added that the entire world will be subject to the rule of Islam in one of three ways: People will either convert to Islam, be forced to pay the jizya poll tax, or be fought against for the sake of Allah.

Abu Taqi Al-Din Al-Dari: Germany and France have begun to grow old, in the sense that their young people do not view marriage as something desirable. People there, especially the youth, have begun to shun marriage, unlike the Muslims. For example, it is said that in 2050, Muslims in France will outnumber the French. But it is not these numbers that we are counting on to turn France into an Islamic country. What we are counting on is that Muslims must have a country that will bring Islam—its guidance, its light, its message and its mercy—to the people [of the West] through Jihad for the sake of Allah. When people see the justness, light, guidance and mercy of Islam, “they will enter the religion of Allah in droves,” [as it says in the Koran], at the hands of a country that will bring them Islam through Jihad for the sake of Allah.

[…]

Not so long ago, only 400 years ago, at the time of the Ottoman state, Muslims conquered Poland and Austria. The Islamic state reached the walls of Vienna, the capital of Austria, and the call to prayer was recited there. All the countries of the [former] USSR were under the auspices of the Islamic State—the countries of the Caucasus and what is beyond them. Muslim Mongols ruled China until 1644; Muslims conquered Hungary in 1526. In 1537, they conquered parts of Italy, like Otranto. In 1543, under the auspices of the Ottoman state, Muslim armies reached Toulon, in France, and they built a mosque there, in the heart of France. In 1586, India was ruled by Islam. These events portend that the Islamic nation is capable of returning to its former self and spreading Islam, Allah willing.

Subscribe to The JNS Daily Syndicate

by email and never miss

our top stories

[…]

Thus, the rule of Islam will spread to the entire world, in one of three ways: Conversion to Islam, payment of the jizya poll tax, or we will ask for Allah’s help and fight them, until the entire world is subject to the rule of Islam.

[…]
