Election wrap for March 25

Intense fervour can be felt with dates to the upcoming Lok Sabha elections coming close.

Each day has something new to offer. Not only are Bharatiya Janata Party and Congress strategising in full swing, but all the political parties, across the country are involved in planning about the Lok Sabha polls 2019.

The political activity is refusing to die down as the ruling Bharatiya Janata Party and other parties are announcing candidates for the upcoming elections.

Meanwhile, while making a huge election promise, Congress president Rahul Gandhi on Monday announced that 20 per cent families belonging to the poorest category will be given Rs 72,000 each annually as minimum income if his party comes to power.

While making the announcement at a press conference, Gandhi said five crore families and 25 crore will directly benefit from the scheme.

"Final assault on poverty has begun. We will wipe out poverty from the country," he said.

On the other hand, former Assam CM Tarun Gogoi slammed Prime Minister Narendra Modi for neglecting BJP veterans, including LK Advani.

This comes after not BJP patriarch Lal Krishna Advani, but Amit Shah, will be fighting from Gandhinagar.

Here are some of the big highlights of the day:

JD(S) gives back Bangalore North LS seat to Congress

With two days left for filing of nominations for the first phase of polls in Karnataka, the Congress on Monday said that its coalition partner JD(S) has conceded the Bangalore North Lok Sabha seat to it.

AICC General Secretary in-charge of Karnataka K C Venugopal thanked JD(S) patriarch and former Prime Minister HD Deve Gowda for the move calling it a "kind gesture."

Paralympic athlete Deepa Malik, INLD MLA Kehar Singh Rawat join BJP

Deepa Malik, a noted para athlete, on Monday joined the BJP (Bharatiya Janata Party) with the party asserting that her presence will strengthen the organisation.

She joined the BJP in the presence of the party's Haryana unit chief Subhash Barala, and general secretary Anil Jain, who is in charge of its affairs in the state.

INLD MLA Kehar Singh Rawat also joined the party along with Malik.

NCP's poll manifesto

Sharad Pawar led Nationalist Congress Party (NCP) on Monday released its manifesto for 2019 Lok Sabha elections with a slew of promises including complete loan waiver to farmers, structural reforms to drive sustainable agriculture growth, 33 per cent reservation to women in the parliament, scrapping of Triple Talaq Bill in the present form, meaningful labour reforms to promote ease of doing business and attract new investments and removal of policy and tax uncertainties.

Besides this, NCP has also assured Equal Work Equal Pay to all employees, establishment of Equal Opportunities Commission, enactment of a law ensuring Right to Health and implementation of a single GST (Goods and Services Tax) rate or maximum of two rates.

For the youngsters, the party has proposed a '100 day guaranteed jobs for graduate youths in urban areas'.

Further, the party has proposed that cases of violence against minorities will be investigated in a time bound manner and its disposal in special courts.

Argument between Dikshit and Maken regarding alliance with AAP

A heated argument took place between Delhi Congress leaders when they were meeting party chief Rahul Gandhi to take a final call about possible alliance with AAP (Aam Aadmi Party).

With Delhi party unity split vertically regarding an alliance with AAP, the party leaders were unanimous that Rahul Gandhi should take the final call.

According to sources, there was heated argument between Sheila Dikshit and Ajay Maken in the meeting.

Sheila Dikshit asked Maken that what was he doing as Delhi Congress chief in the last four years that now he is advocating for an alliance.

Sheila Dikshit, Yoganand Shastri and three state working presidents were not in favour of alliance.

Rahul Gandhi's BIG election promise

Congress president Rahul Gandhi on Monday, ahead of the election, made a huge promise wherein he announced that 20 per cent families belonging to the poorest category will be given Rs 72,000 each annually as minimum income if his party comes to power.

Gandhi also said that five crore families and 25 crore will directly benefit from the scheme.

Former Assam CM Tarun Gogoi slams PM Modi for neglecting LK Advani

Senior Congress leader and former Assam Chief Minsiter Tarun Gogoi slammed PM Narendra Modi for the "neglect" shown to the veterans in the BJP.

He also expressed sadness over denial of ticket to former Deputy Prime Minister LK Advani, who has been replaced by BJP President Amit Shah in Gandhinagar seat.

Sikkim CM Chamling files nomination from 2 assembly constituencies

Sikkim Chief Minister and Sikkim Democratic Front (SDF) president Pawan Kumar Chamling, the longest serving chief minister of the country, on Monday filed his nomination papers from two assembly constituencies.

Chamling, who has been in power since December 12, 1994 will fight to retain office for the eighth successive term.

The 68-year-old chief minister is seeking re-election to the state legislative assembly from Namchi-Singithang and Poklok-Kamrang seats in his native south Sikkim.

(With inputs from agencies)
