Goa police on alert over threat to Israelis

NT NETWORK

PANAJI

In view of the alert on a possible threat to Israeli tourists, the Goa police have taken up necessary security measures.

The possible threat from the Islamic State and the Al-Qaida to Israeli tourists could be in retaliation to the mass shootings at two mosques in Christchurch, New Zealand, on March 15, sources have claimed referring to the inputs from central intelligence agencies.

Consequently, the Goa police have provided security to a Chabad house in Canacona.

In Goa, there are three Chabad houses, which are visited by Israeli tourists.

One Chabad house is in Canacona taluka in South Goa, while two houses are in North Goa – one at Anjuna, while the other is at Morjim.

The sources said the Chabad houses in North Goa are not in operation.

Over 10 foreigners assembled at the Canacona Chabad house on Sunday for prayers.

Inspector-general of police Jaspal Singh said, “Both the districts SPs have been briefed. We have adopted necessary security measures in view of the alert.”

A police guard has been deployed at the Chabad house in Canacona, and police personnel have been asked to maintain maximum alert.

Police officials said that many foreigners, particularly Israelis, have left the state as the tourist season is at the fag-end in this month.

It is learnt that as many 2600 Israelis have left Goa. However, a few Israelis could still be living in the state, here and there.

AGENCIES ADD FROM NEW DELHI: The intelligence agencies have alerted the police in Delhi, Mumbai and Goa about twin threats from the Islamic State and the Al-Qaida,

The inputs, which warn of avenging the New Zealand incident and possible strike on Jewish establishments, have come in a span of four days.

The inputs suggest that terrorists might try to use a vehicle or a knife in the attacks. The agencies have also suggested an increase in vigil around the Israeli embassy, consulate general in Mumbai as well as synagogues and Chabad houses.
