New crimes, new partner, Maria Susairaj back in headlines

Kannada starlet

Neeraj Grover

Paromita Chakraborty

Maria Susairaj

Anita Vedpathak

(From left) Suraj Jaiswal, Amit Sharma, Sandhya Mishra and Mansi Pandit have filed complaints against Maria, Paromita and Anita

By Raju Shinde and Vinay DalviThe– who served jail term in connection with the murder of TV executivein 2008 – has been named in seven complaints of cheating in Thane and Mumbai with her partnerKannada starlet, who served a jail term in connection with the sensational murder of a television executive in 2008, is now on the run from the Mumbai and Thane police in multiple cases of cheating, forgery and intimidation.Maria -- along with her partners Paromita Chakraborty and-- has been named in seven complaints. Maria’s anticipatory bail in one of the cases registered against her in Thane was rejected by the Bombay High Court in January this year and she has been on the run ever since.Maria – whose dream to make it big in Bollywood was derailed when her boyfriend, naval officer Emile Jerome Mathew, killed TV executive Neeraj Grover in her presence – met Paromita and Anita while serving time in Byculla jail.Paromita was in jail for cheating Sandhya Mishra, an Oshiwara housewife whose apartment she had rented, of Rs 2.5 crore. She borrowed the sum on the pretext of paying off income tax officials to get assets worth Rs 30-40 crore de-frozen. Mishra was promised her money would be returned with interest.Anita was in jail for stealing signed cheques worth Rs 50 crore from the offices of Angel Broking Limited in MIDC, Andheri (east). The three got along famously in the jail and remained friends after Susairaj’s term ended and the other two were released on bail.In all seven complaints lodged against the trio, Paromita posed as former West Bengal chief minister Buddhadeb Bhattacharjee’s daughter and Anita as a power-broker.In each case, the trio would either offer crores of rupees in easy loans to its victims or lure them into a partnership in a business venture with promise of big profits.Maria and Paromita shared the apartments in Thane where meetings with the victims took place. In all seven complaints, victims have mentioned Maria’s presence when deals were discussed. Police now have in their possession several of Maria and Paromita’s pictures, some of them clicked on holidays across the country.Among the trio’s earliest victims was Kamal Jain, a partner in a jewellery business in JJ Marg area. According to the complaint filed by Jain at the JJ Marg police station Maria, Paromita and Anita bought jewellery from his store on multiple occasions in 2013. While they paid for some of their purchases, the three did not clear bills worth Rs 88 lakh. When Jain began asking for the money, he began receiving threats from various quarters. On one such occasion, a history sheeter from Ahmedabad visited his store and asked him to “settle the matter with the three women.”On another occasion, a man posing as a police officer visited the shop and repeated what the history sheeter had earlier communicated and warned Jain that he should not file a police complaint. “Paromita was introduced to me by constable Pratibha Mhatre of the Byculla women’s prison, who was my old customer,” Jain has said in his police complaint, alluding to the three women’s connections in the police department.Jain later learnt that Maria and Paromita have a cheating case registered against them in Vadodara in Gujarat, where they accepted money from several people for Haj pilgrimage and then one day just vanished with all the money.In another case, Anita Vedpathak offered a loan to her nephew Ashish Vedpathak for setting up a mineral water plant in April 2015. She took Ashish to Paromita, who said that large assets of hers had been frozen by the income tax department and if Ashish gave her Rs 25 lakh, it would be no problem for her to free her assets and offer him a large loan he needed for his business. Ashish has told the police that Maria was present at this meeting. Once Ashish paid off Rs 25 lakh, Paromita began asking for more money. The three offered Ashish help to mortgage his father’s apartment in Girgaon and a piece of land the family owned in Raigad. Ashish later realised that under the garb of mortgaging the properties, the three women had sold the house and the plot.Ashish has filed a police complaint against the three with the Mira Road police and he is waiting for the police to register an FIR.Similarly, around the same time Anita cheated another nephew of hers, identified by the cops as Vinit Pathankar, of Rs 25 lakh.Some of the victims of Maria, Paromita and Anita have now written to Chief Minister Devendra Fadnavis. Mansi Pandit, who runs two beauty parlours in Thane, and has been cheated by the trio, told Mumbai Mirror that police seem reluctant to file an FIR against the three. “The three offered me cheap loans in 2016. They said they could organise up to Rs 2 crore for me. The meetings took place in plush restaurants. They always arrived in big cars and spent freely. I later learnt it was all a carefully calibrated show,” said Mansi.Manasi too was asked to pay Rs 25 lakh so that Paromita could pay off income tax officials to defreeze her accounts. Mansi borrowed money from friends and relatives. Of course, once the money was paid, none of the three women would even take her calls. She was also threatened by a goon from Ahmedabad and a man posing as a police officer when she insisted on meeting Maria and her partners.The letter written to the chief minister says that Maria, Paromita and Anita have siphoned off Rs 33 crore from various victims. For some strange reason, the police have not yet discerned a pattern in the trio’s cheating cases and continue to treat each case separately. “We have asked the chief minster to form a Special Investigation Team (SIT) to investigate the three’s activities,” said Manasi, who added that there are many more victims of trio who are not coming forward to file complaints either because they have been threatened or because they are being blackmailed with pictures in compromising positions.Advocate Naveen Chomal, who represents Maria, Paromita and Anita, said his clients have no idea about these cheating cases. “These are motivated allegations made by a group of seasoned blackmailers,” he said.Police Inspector Rajkumar Kothmire, who is attached to the Thane Anti Extortion Cell, said a separate team has been set up to investigate the allegations against the three. “We are looking for Maria. Paromita too has violated her bail conditions. Anita is out on bail,” he said. Senior Police Inspector G D Pingale of Chitalsar police stiaton in Thane said that he is in the process of registering a case in the Mansi Pandit case against Maria, Paromita and Anita.
