Pakistan-born, Asif Karadia, to be Indian citizen

Bombay High Court

Asif Karadia

Indian citizenship

Pakistan

After living under the threat of deportation for more than three years, after two years of litigation in the, several court orders, and finally a warning to Union government officials, 54-year-old Jogeshwari residentwill finally get, and will cease to be a “man with no country”.A division bench of Justices Abhay Oka and Manoj Sanklecha on Monday disposed of a petition filed by Asif Karadia and his father Abbas, after the Union government assured the court that it would issue a citizenship certificate to Karadia within the next 10 days. The bench had, during a hearing last week, warned home ministry officials that they would be charged with contempt of court for not following a previous bench’s order of December 20 last year.This newspaper had reported in its January 19, 2019, edition that Karadia had received a letter from the Union government notifying him of “in-principle” approval of his citizenship request. The letter, however, asked him to give up citizenship of any other country (which in his case was) and submit proof of the same for his application to be finally processed. This, despite Karadia repeatedly pleading that he was never a citizen of any other country, and therefore, there was no question of submitting any proof. In fact, a division bench headed by Justice SC Dharmadhikari, in its December 20 order, had called the government’s demand “unwarranted.” Advocate Sujay Kantawala, who appeared for Karadia in the court, called the government’s communication “non-application of mind” and said that this proved the callous and casual approach of the officials.It was this observation by the previous bench that Justice Oka’s bench referred to in the hearing last week, and said that not following that observation would amount to contempt of court by the officials, nudging them make a statement on Monday.Such was the curious case of Karadia that even the High Court termed it “unique” when he approached it seeking Indian nationality. Karadia was born in Karachi because his mother, a Pakistani married to an Indian, wanted to deliver her first-born at her maternal home. Karadia was barely two years old when he returned with his mother to Mumbai in 1967 and has been living here since. His mother was granted Indian citizenship in 1972. All his younger siblings, as well as his wife and children, are Indian citizens. His problems began in 2012 when he applied for a passport to travel to Mecca for Haj. Four years later, the government threatened him with deportation to Pakistan, after which he moved the HC.Karadia had already told the court that in 1967, when he was brought to India, he had entered the country on his mother’s passport, as toddlers were not issued passports back then.
