Election News: As defectors flow in, fears of ‘revolving doors’ rise in BJP

MUMBAI: Chief minister Devendra Fadnavis is rolling out the red carpet for last-minute defectors from the Congress-NCP camp in Maharashtra , most of them second- and third-generation dynasts who now see BJP as a viable alternative.The need for political survival and safeguarding families’ economic interests are key considerations that have triggered defections, analysts say. But for many BJP veterans, the idea that the novitiates may get instant rewards for crossing fences while old-timers may get passed over for tickets and posts is disquieting. What impact will this have on the Sangh, which professes the values of spartan living and selfless volunteerism? Will the ‘aayaram-gayaram’ culture of political opportunism take root in BJP too?A BJP MP analysed the dilemma of inducting fresh talent by saying, “Times have changed. We are no longer in the Vajpayee era. The earlier generation of BJP workers was honest and hard-working, but that isn’t enough to win seats. We have to beat the Congress at its own game.”BJP’s Maharashtra unit hasreportedly worked out a plan to poach candidates from Congress, NCP and other parties following a diktat from party president Amit Shah Among recent converts to BJP are Sujay Vikhe-Patil, son of senior Congress leader and sugar baron Radhakrishna Vikhe-Patil, who joined last week after his father failed to persuade NCP to let Sujay contest from Ahmednagar as the Congress nominee. Sujay was followed by Ranjitsinh Mohite-Patil from Solapur, son of NCP heavyweight and former deputy CM Vijaysinh Mohite-Patil. Vijaysinh, who is said to be sulking in NCP, goaded his son into joining BJP and may join BJP himself, sources said.On Monday, Congress saw its latest defection as Ranjitsinh Naik-Nimbalkar, its Satara district chief, joined BJP. He will contest from Madha.Intra-party squabbling and hopes of poll tickets or appointments to state-run bodies is the principal reason these Congress and NCP satraps are wooing BJP, it is said. “With a large section of Congress voters shifting their loyalty to the BJP there is nothing wrong if we welcome Congressmen or NCP functionaries into the party fold,” Alavani said.An old-time BJP functionary, since retired, however cautioned, “The ‘open door’ policy can change into a ‘revolving door’ policy overnight if the BJP fails to reach the 272 mark.”
