NHRC warns Odisha of action for neglecting Laxman Naik’s village

Kendrapara: The National Human Rights Commission (NHRC) has warned the Chief Secretary of action for neglecting martyr Laxman Naik’s village Tentuligumma in Koraput district.

Social activist Radhakanta Tripathy had filed two petitions on the issue. Initially, the NHRC directed the state to act on the issue within eight weeks.

When the government did not react, Tripathy filed another petition highlighting the rights violation due to the government machinery’s “inertia”.

He said 1,000 villagers of Tentuliguma, the birthplace of martyr Laxman Naik, were facing problems due to the government’s apathy.

There are no roads or other basic facilities in the area. Laxman Naik played a key role in India’s freedom struggle, but Tentuliguma is still in the throes of illiteracy and backwardness.

Even today, the village does not have good roads or a bridge to reach the block headquarters town of Boipariguda, 40 km away. The people have to travel through Govindapalli block of Malkangiri district covering 70-km to reach Boipariguda.

Malkangiri district headquarters is just 70-km away from the village. Mathili is 25-km from Tentuligumma. The Koraput district headquarters town is 120 km away and it takes three days to reach there.

The women here give birth at their homes as they do not want to risk their lives by travelling long distances. Most children here are malnourished and women suffer from nutrition deficiency.

Ambulances can never reach the village in case of emergencies. Pregnant women are forced to die or deliver without medical aid. The children here give up education and senior citizens have no medicare. The condition of the disabled is unbearable.

Pensions do not reach the beneficiaries here. Many people live in difficult conditions after they were displaced by various projects, and are often caught between security forces and Naxals, the petition said.

Tripathy requested the NHRC to investigate the case in detail by a team of officials or through a Special Rapporteur, direct the Chief Secretary, the state Ministry of Health and Family Welfare, the Union Ministry of Rural Development and the Koraput Collector to act immediately and ensure healthcare and other basic facilities for the villagers.

He requested the NHRC to ensure that the benefits of social welfare schemes are provided to the villagers.

The NHRC took cognisance of the matter April 20, 2018 and directed the officials to send a copy of the complaint to the concerned authorities and sought an action taken report from them within four weeks.

The Chief Secretary, however, has not filed the requisite report despite being asked by the NHRC (vide letter dated September 27, 2018). So the registry was asked to remind the Chief Secretary to file a report on the matter within six weeks.

If this is not done, the Commission would be forced to use its powers under Section 13 of the Protection of Human Rights Act, 1993, the NHRC warned.

PNN
