Congress news: Congress hopes dole will steal BJP’s Balakot thunder

NEW DELHI: Announcing its mega promise of the Rs 6,000 monthly dole to India’s poorest families, Congress sought to anticipate scepticism about the scheme’s viability and said the payout will not derail the country’s fiscal balance. “The entire calculations have been done. The fiscal repercussions have been analysed. This money is perfectly available. This scheme is perfectly doable,” Congress chief Rahul Gandhi said.The party hopes the announcement will help reduce the focus on BJP’s high-decibel campaign after the Balakot airstrikes. Congress feels a discussion on jobs and farm distress can help the opposition while BJP’s “nationalism” plank dilutes the emphasis.Having set off a debate on the viability of “right to minimum income” during a poll rally in January, Rahul provided “with pride” details on the proposed scheme which is an elaboration of the rights-based approach followed by UPA governments from 2004-14.Refining the idea, in-house economists determined that the average income of the poorest households was Rs 6,000 a month even as they set a target income of Rs 12,000. As a result, the poll promise is that a Congress-led government will make a standard transfer of Rs 6,000 to each of the poorest 20% households in the country, which comes to 5 crore families covering 25 crore people. The scheme will be rolled out in two phases, starting with half of the poorest beneficiaries. Sources ex-FM P Chidambaram pegged its cost at Rs 1.8 lakh crore in the first year.As per sources, Congress will promise that this income would be transferred to bank accounts of women heads of households. Interestingly, with Congress seeing “right to minimum income” being identified with Rahul, it has decided to call the scheme by its Hindi acronym “Nyay” (Nyuntam Aay Yojana). The concept was put forth by Rahul’s sister Priyanka Gandhi Vadra at a CWC meeting in Ahmedabad last month. “Nyay” in Hindi translates to justice.With Nyay, Congress hopes to steer the debate towards welfarism which the party believes is its strong suit, having lost the narrative post-Balakot which helped BJP roll out “national security” as a campaign plank. After the CWC discussed Nyay along with the upcoming manifesto, Rahul addressed a presser where he used the scheme to paint PM Modiled BJP “anti-poor”. “If Modi can give money to the richest Indians, Congress can give money to the poorest,” he said.
