Consulted many economists, including Raghuram Rajan, for minimum income scheme : Rahul Gandhi in Rajasthan

Congress President Rahul Gandhi | Photo Credit: ANI

Jaipur: Congress President Rahul Gandhi on Tuesday addressed two rallies and a Booth Workers meeting in Rajasthan's Bundi, Suratgarh and Jaipur respectively. Taking aim at BJP-led NDA government over a number of issues, Congress scion also came out all guns blazing on Prime Minister Narendra Modi. From demonetisation to Rafale jet deals, Rahul Gandhi attacked PM Modi, but the most stinging remark came against the Rashtriya Swayamsevak Sangh (RSS) when Rahul took a swipe at the outfit and said that Congress workers don't work in half-pants wielding lathis.

Through the jibe, Rahul suggested that there was an inherent difference between the Congress workers and the RSS cadre. While the latter was busy in doing 'hate politics, the former is buys working for the country through politics, Rahul said. On PM Modi's powerful slogan of 'Congress Mukt Bharat', Congress scion said that his party would fight the BJP but will not eradicate it. "Congress will fight the Lok Sabha elections with love and will defeat the BJP," Rahul Gandhi said.

Notably, on the minimum income scheme, NYAY, announced by the party, Rahul said that PM Modi had promised to give Rs 15 lakh but his party will implement the promise. Rahul added that the scheme was a result of much deliberation and the party even consulted several economists including former RBI governor Raghuram Rajan.

Addressing a rally in Suratgarh, Rahul promised a "surgical strike" on poverty with his NYAY scheme. We will eradicate poverty in the country. This is a ''dhamaka (blast)''. No country has done this in history. There should not be a single poor person in the country," Gandhi said.

After the announcement of NYAY scheme on Monday, Rahul on Tuesday announced another ambitious scheme, this time for the entrepreneurs. Rahul said that an exemption for 3 years will be provided, meaning that no permission from the government will be required for new startups and companies."You can file for permissions you need after 3 years," Rahul was quoted by ANI as saying.

Addressing the party booth workers in Jaipur, Rahul said that PM Modi is trapped in its own web of lies and their slogan of "Acche Din Aagaye" from 2014 has now become "Chowkidar Chor hai". Rahul pointed out PM Modi's first speech in the parliament when the PM spoke about bullet trains and organic farming in Sikkim, and said that it a hollow speech, as it lacked the truth.

Taking on PM Modi for mocking MANREGA, Rahul during his rally at Bundi, said that PM Modi doesn't understand the scheme, but the common people do.

Describing the scheme as not just a way to get potholes dug, Rahul asserted that it gave jobs to crores of people. "In villages, people made different things. They made roads, built lakes, and when all these people worked, they got money, when they got money, factories were set up. Those people who worked and got money under MNREGA began buying things, factories were set up to manufacture those things, factories generated jobs, this kick-started the economy. But the PM didn’t understand this,” Rahul said.


