Promises and promises

All political parties, both regional and national, are on a promise-making spree and with the poor in mind. Every day there seems to be a new announcement on freebies either as doles or or as loan waivers (Page 1, “Garibi Hatao 2.0: Rahul promises to wipe out poverty”, March 26). The political class appears hell-bent on making people dependent on them. They are only making people lazy. And whose money are they distributing? It is the middle class which works hard and pays taxes.

If our politicians want to alleviate poverty, they can do so by providing the masses with better education and health. They can turn around farming with better farming techniques. India is a young country and we should make best use of our young population, providing them with education and skill development and taking care of their communities. Instead all our politicians want immediate results, their only aim being to win the elections by hook or by crook. No political party talks extensively about the development of the nation.

Lalitha Viswanadha,

Nellore, Andhra Pradesh

This is not the first time that leaders of political parties make hollow slogans especially at the time of elections. There was Indira Gandhi with “Garibi Hatao”, Atal Bihari Vajpayee with “India Shining” and Narendra Modi with “New India”.

There are still millions affected by starvation, without health care (which is the primary need of people) and agrarian distress. Voters need to be cautious, alert and vote carefully.

S.K. Khosla,

Chandigarh

How will funds be generated for this scheme? And what about corruption or pilferage of money? The fact is that a huge chunk of our population is still poor without even a nutritious square meal a day. The gap between the rich and the poor is widening every day while the wealth of politicians across the spectrum multiplies every five years. Political parties should be advised and warned by the judiciary not to misuse tax-payer money especially during election time.

Sops only end up making people lazy. Instead the money can be put to use for industrialisation and creating the infrastructure that will give jobs to our unemployed youth.

Sravana Ramachandran,

Chennai

For decades we have had several catchy political slogans, from the famous “Garibi Hatao” to “Achhe Din”. This has been followed by massive public investments and planning, but can it be said that these steps have ensured a better life for the poor and the illiterate masses? The rich have their own agenda and the middle class just about manages to survive. Why is our country still lagging behind even smaller nations as far as social indices are concerned? Politics in India is such that the leaders once elected forget about the people who voted for them.

A. Michael Dhanaraj,

Coimbatore
