Soudha Saubhagyavati Bhava! Anitha Kumaraswamy’s son and DK Shivakumar’s daughter in alliance talks

DK Shivakumar

Anitha Kumaraswamy

Lok Sabha elections

.

.

From arch political rivals to thick friends, Chief Minister HD Kumara­swamy and Water Resources Ministerhave come a long way.If the Chief Minister’s wifehas her way, the new-found bonding between the two leaders could result in an alliance and not a political one.Sources close to the two political families say that Anitha and one of DK Shivakumar’s daughters bonded instantly and the former is very keen to have the young lady as a prospective daughter-in-law.Incidentally, the prospective daughter-in-law like Anitha is also an engineering graduate. Bangalore Mirror is holding back the name of the girl and not publishing her photograph to protect her privacy as no final decision has been taken on the alliance.The girl who is now busy managing her father’s Global Academy of Technology, an engineering college near Rajarajeshwari Nagar has not just impressed Anitha, but also her son Nikhil.The 28-year-old budding film actor and a politician is contesting thefrom Mandya on a JD(S) ticket.After her son’s nod, Anitha is said to have checked with astrologers if their horoscopes matched and sources say, they do, and quite perfectly at that. This has paved the way for initial talks between the two families, say sources.It is, however, not clear if Shivakumar and Kumaraswamy are keen on the alliance. A few months ago, Anitha shot down a proposal by Kumaraswamy from Andhra Pradesh. The couple went to see a girl in Vijayawada in September 2018. The girl was the daughter of Bodapudi Siva Kotesswara Rao, who owns Profit Shoe Company Private limited.In 2015, Nikhil was engaged to Swathi, the daughter of film producer KCN Mohan. It was, however, called off after a few months.Shivakumar has been seen as Political Foe No 1 by the entire HD Deve Gowda clan. It was Shivakumar who defeated Gowda in the Lok Sabha polls from Kanankapura (now Benagaluru rural) constituency by fielding a political novice, journalist Tejaswini Gowda. The JD(S) supremo ensured that Shivakumar was kept out of the late Dharam Singh cabinet when his party forged an alliance with the Congress.Both Kumaraswamy and Shivakumar were locked in a bitter battle trading personal insinuations against each other when the latter was the Chief Minister between 2006 and 07.But as the saying goes, there are no permanent friends or enemies in politics. Kumaraswamy and Shivakumar worked in tandem when the present coalition government was under threat from the BJP. But for the two leaders, the government wouldn’t have survived this long.In the last 10 months, both Kumaraswamy and Shivakumar have gained confidence in each other.On Monday, when his son Nikhhil was filing nomination, the Chief Minister said that he and Shivakumar would work like a ‘jodetthu’ (yoke of oxen) for the welfare and development of Mandya.DK Shivakumar, a first generation politician, is one of the richest with declared assets worth Rs 730 crore as per the Assembly election affidavit while his daughter who is being considered as a prospective daughter-in-law by Anitha Kumaraswamy, is worth Rs 100-plus crore.Kumaraswamy and Anitha together have a declared net worth of Rs 167 crore while their son Nikhil has declared wealth of Rs 56.4 crore.
