DNA EXCLUSIVE: Secret to our unity lies in commitment to revive party in Mum, says Milind Deora

In a bid to quell growing dissent in the party, Congress President Rahul Gandhi has appointed his close associate Milind Deora as Mumbai's unit chief. He faces twin challenges of reviving the party's organization and also of winning the South Mumbai seat. It is notable that Milind Deora had threatened to withdraw from his Lok Sabha nomination a few days ago, in the light of the non-inclusive nature of the then president Sanjay Nirupam's leadership and increasing factionalism in the party. In an exclusive interview with DNA, Deora spells out his strategy.

The Congress party is a divided and a demoralised house in the city. How do you plan to rejuvenate it at a time when the election campaign is gathering momentum?

Let me assure you that in the past few weeks, we have deliberated on solutions to boost the morale of our party workers. As I said in my acceptance statement, the party in Mumbai will have an inclusive strategy. In my tenure, no section in the outfit will feel out of place and I am glad they have reposed their confidence in me. In the coming days, we will meet all the workers and give them a patient hearing. Our workers will feel heard and involved. Leadership will give them the confidence they want at this moment.

Party leaders speak in different languages, how do you plan to bring in much-needed unity?

We are a democratic party. When you are an organisation that represents people from all backgrounds, their differences should not be seen as fissures within the party. Of course, leaders should examine if what they say truly helps the party. I am a democrat. I would rather have people speak their minds in favour of the organisation than practise hero-worshipping. The secret to our unity lies in our commitment to revive the party in Mumbai.

Congress has lost its traditional vote bank. How will you win it back?

Nothing is lost permanently. We will practice issue-based, people-centric politics. I go among all communities in the city as a quintessential Mumbaikar and I see that housing, business, and lack of jobs are major issues. In my own constituency, our commitment to MPBT tenants and Rahul Gandhi ji's promise of 500 square feet homes will act as game changers. Please remember that voters are feeling cheated by the Sena and BJP.

As a party chief and south Mumbai nominee what issues will be highlighted during the campaign?

Housing for all, Mumbai Port Trust tenant issue, redevelopment and cluster development of dilapidated buildings, and protection from tax authorities are some of the main issues. I am also highlighting the failure of Shiv Sena MP Arvind Sawant to be a formidable voice in Delhi for South Mumbai.

What are your promises to Mumbaikars?

Some of them include 500 square feet homes, protection of small and medium businesses, redevelopment and cluster development of the old city in Mumbai, rejuvenating urban infrastructure, de-politicisation of development, and safeguarding the social and political rights of every Mumbaikar.

How do you react to your party's promise to implement the minimum income guarantee scheme?

Party President Rahul Gandhi has already said that after being voted to power, the government will implement the minimum income guarantee scheme. It is unfortunate that the BJP-led NDA government, in its five-year tenure, did not do much for the people. The government carried out demonetisation which led to increasing unemployment. The scheme will support the youth, who have lost their jobs in the recent past.
