Former Madhya Pradesh CM Shivraj Singh Chouhan slams BJD, Congress for showing 'no respect' to Pulwama

Former Madhya Pradesh CM Shivraj Singh Chouhan slams BJD, Congress for showing 'no respect' to Pulwama | Photo Credit: BCCL

Bhubaneswar: A number of BJP leaders Tuesday hit out at the ruling BJD and the Congress accusing their leaders of showing scant respect to the victims of Pulwama terror attack and questioning India's retaliatory air strike.

BJP vice-president and former Madhya Pradesh Chief Minister Shivraj Singh Chouhan, Union Minister R K Singh and party vice-president Baijayant Panda slammed the two parties during poll rallies in Nimapara, Jajpur and Balasore respectively.

Criticising Odisha Chief Minister Naveen Patnaik, Chouhan claimed that a BJD MLA had manhandled a relative of a CRPF jawan of Odisha, who was killed in the Pulwama attack. The incident took place shortly before the funeral of the slain soldier Manoj Kumar Behera.

"It is unfortunate that the chief minister did not take any action against the MLA. He did not even condemn the action which triggered public outcry," Chouhan said. The BJP vice-president said Sam Pitroda, the technical advisor to the Odisha Government, had also raised questions on the air strike undertaken by India in Balakot in Pakistan after the Pulwama terror strike.

"Like the BJD MLA who assaulted the martyr's relative, Pitroda was also close to the chief minister," he said. Chouhan also came down heavily on Congress for raising questions about the Balakot air strike and its outcome. Alleging that crimes against women in Odisha showed an alarming rise, he said conviction rate in heinous crimes like rape is abysmally low in the state.

He claimed that Odisha government has failed to provide basic amenities including electricity and water to farmers for which they are committing suicide. Chouhan further alleged that the chief minister is shielding corrupt officials during his 19 years of rule.

Addressing a pubic meeting at Jajpur, Union Minister of State for New and Renewable Energy, Raj Kumar Singh said people have full faith on Prime Minister Narendra Modi because of significant achievements made during the last five years. The people of Odisha are also keen to bring about a change as there has been no development and they are fed up with corruption, he said.

Retaliation of Pulwama terror attack is a strong message to Pakistan and China that India will take strong action if it is attacked, he said. At a rally at Remuna in Balasore, Panda said people of Odisha now want change as there has been a rise in crime against women and children in the last 19 years.
