Top Current Affairs Quiz: 27 March 2019

27 March 2019: The Current Affairs Quizzes section of Jagranjosh aims to help every competitive exam aspirant to revise the day at ease. The day’s updated quizzes cover topics such as Mission Shakti, RBI penalty and first Indian Army Mountaineering Expedition among others.



1. Which nation has become the 4th largest space power?



a) Japan

b) Germany

c) India

d) France



2. The Supreme Court has warned which bank for non-disclosure of bank inspection reports?



a) Bank of Baroda

b) Reserve Bank of India

c) Canara Bank

d) Central Bank of India



3. The Reserve Bank of India has imposed Rs 2 crore penalty on which public sector bank?



a) State Bank of India

b) UCO Bank

c) Canara Bank

d) Punjab National Bank



4. Which social media platform has set up a 24x7 response team for 2019 Lok Sabha elections?



a) Twitter

b) Instagram

c) Facebook

d) Whatsapp



5. Which online streaming service has piloted a $4 worth mobile plan in India to woo users?



a) Netflix

b) Amazon Prime

c) Hotstar

d) HBO Now



6. India has begun a new cruise service along with which nation?



a) Myanmar

b) Bangladesh

c) Sri Lanka

d) Indonesia



7. What was the title of white paper recently issued by China on democratic reforms in Tibet?



a) People’s rule in Tibet – after a long hiatus

b) Democratic Reform in Tibet - Sixty Years On

c) Tibet is free – People’s rule prevails

d) How China brought democracy in Tibet



8. First Indian Army Mountaineering Expedition was flagged off recently to which peak?



a) Mt. Makalu

b) Mt. Everest

c) Mt. Kamet

d) Mt. Hardeol



9. Which of the following IIT has developed AI-based system to detect malaria, tuberculosis and other diseases?



a) IIT Kharagpur

b) IIT Pune

c) IIT Madras

d) IIT Delhi



10. Which European country has recently honoured President Ram Nath Kovind with its highest civilian order?



a) Chile

b) Spain

c) Croatia

d) Belgium



Answers



1. (c) India



Prime Narendra Modi on March 27, 2019 announced that India has established itself as the world's 4th largest space super power. The PM announced the success of ‘Mission Shakti’, in which Indian scientists successfully targeted and brought down a live satellite on a Low Earth Orbit with an anti-satellite missile (A-SAT) within a matter of just three minutes.



2. (b) Reserve Bank of India



The Supreme Court of India on March 26, 2019 took a strong note of non-disclosure of the annual inspection report of banks by the Reserve Bank of India under the Right to Information Act. The apex court threatened to slap punitive order against RBI for not adhering to its earlier order on making its bank inspection report public.



3. (d) Punjab National Bank



The Reserve Bank of India has imposed a penalty worth Rs 2 crore on Punjab National Bank for non-compliance of regulatory directions with regard to SWIFT operations. SWIFT is a global messaging software, which is used for sharing information on inter-bank transactions by financial entities.



4. (c) Facebook



Facebook is putting in place a response team for India’s general elections for monitoring and tracking of objectionable content in real time round the clock, a top official at the social network said. The election response team will be based in Singapore and will work closely with the Election Commission of India.



5. (a) Netflix



Netflix Inc is testing a Rs 250 rupee monthly subscription for mobile devices in India to boost its presence in a price-sensitive market where data consumption on smartphones is surging. The California-based Netflix currently offers three monthly plans in India, ranging from Rs 500- 800 but those are still expensive compared with similar offerings from rivals.



6. (b) Bangladesh



India and Bangladesh will start a cruise service from March 29, 2019 that would take passengers through the Sunderbans to Dhaka. The move aims to strengthen inland waterway routes between the two countries.



7. (b) Democratic Reform in Tibet - Sixty Years On



China's State Council Information Office on issued a white paper on democratic reform and the leap of development in Tibet over the past six decades on March 26, 2019. White paper titled "Democratic Reform in Tibet - Sixty Years On" claims that democratic reform in Tibet is the greatest and most profound social transformation in the history of Tibet.



8. (a) Mt. Makalu



First Indian Army Mountaineering Expedition to Mt Makalu (8485m) was flagged off on March 26, 2019. Expedition team comprises five Officers, two JCOs and eleven other officers. This expedition was flagged off by Director General Military Training.



9. (d) IIT Delhi



Indian Institute of Technology (IIT) Delhi announced recently that they have developed an Artificial Intelligence (AI) based electronic hardware system to detect malaria, tuberculosis, intestinal parasite, and cervical cancer in milliseconds.



10. (c) Croatia



President Ram Nath Kovind was honoured with Croatia's highest state award - The Grand Order of the King of Tomislav, on March 26, 2019. Kovind is in the European country as part of his eight-day three-nation visit to Croatia, Bolivia and Chile to further strengthen bilateral ties between India and the three countries
