Mamata Banerjee brushes off Rahul Gandhi’s scathing attack, says ‘he is just a kid’

Mamata Banerjee

Kolkata: West Bengal Chief Minister Mamata Banerjee on Wednesday brushed off Congress president Rahul Gandhi's attack on her government by calling him a "kid". Four days ago, 48-year-old Gandhi had launched a stinging attack against the Trinamool Congress government for not fulfilling the promises made to the people.

Speaking to reporters, Banerjee said, "Gandhi has said whatever he felt like. I won't like to make any comment on it. He is just a kid. What will I say about it?" Incidentally, the BJP has mocked Gandhi by being calling him a “Pappu”, referring to his alleged political immaturity.

While launching his party's Lok Sabha poll campaign in West Bengal, the Congress chief had blamed both Prime Minister Narendra Modi and the Trinamool Congress supremo of not being able to fulfill the promises of the people. Addressing a rally in Malda, Gandhi had claimed that nothing had changed in Bengal because there had been no development in the state under TMC chief.

“Bengal is being run by just one person. She neither talks to anyone nor takes anybody's suggestion. She does whatever she feels like,” Gandhi had said. He had further said, ““Tell me what has Mamataji done for you. Nothing has been done for the farmers and youth. There is unemployment everywhere. Only Mamataji’s speeches go on all day long.”

The Congress chief sought to draw similarities between the 34-year-old rule of the Communist Party of India (Marxist)-led Left Front and the present TMC government in the state. “You have seen the CPI(M) rule for years …The atrocities that used to happen during the CPI(M ) rule are still happening under Mamataji. Earlier there was a government of one organisation and now there is government of one person.”

Meanwhile, Banerjee also refused to comment on Congress’ recently announced minimum basic income program, which Gandhi said the party would implement if it came to power. Gandhi said that the poorest families would benefit with the Rs 6,000-per month dole every year.

The West Bengal CM said, “Congress have made an announcement and it would not be right for us to make a comment on it.”
