HD Kumaraswamy: PM Narendra Modi is misusing I-T Dept to threaten JD(S) and Congress leaders

Mamata Banerjee

Mandya

Lok Sabha

Hon'ble PM @NarendraModi is misusing the IncomeTax Dept to threaten the political leaders of Karnataka from JDS and… https://t.co/dWLW107UNI — H D Kumaraswamy (@hd_kumaraswamy) 1553703506000

Karnataka

PM @narendramodi's real surgical strike is out in the open through IT dept raids. The constitutional post offer for… https://t.co/Ihi5BPm6pK — H D Kumaraswamy (@hd_kumaraswamy) 1553748005000

Income Tax raids on several JD(S) leaders and party 'supporters' has taken a political turn with former prime minister HD Deve Gowda and Chief Minister HD Kumaraswamy deciding to stage a protest in front of the I-T offices in Bengaluru.Several Ministers of the Kumaraswamy Cabinet, legislators including the Congress leaders are expected to join the protest.On Wednesday, Kumaraswamy had warned that he might be forced to take a route of Bengal Chief Minister, who had staged a protest against the CBI for arresting the top cop in Bengal.Grandsons of former prime minister HD Deve Gowda are contesting fromand Hassan. In Mandya, Nikhil son of Chief Minister is in fray while in Hassan Prajwal, son of PWD Minister HD Revanna is contesting.The raids which began hours after the Chief Minister stated that close to 300 officials from outside the State to conduct targeted I-T raids on the rival parties - JD(S) and Congress besides these party 'supporters'.The raids began late on Wednesday night and intensified on Thursday morning. Multiple raids were conducted on offices and residences of Minor Irrigation Minister CS Puttaraju, his nephew Ashok, JD(S) MLC BM Farooq and his Fiz Group of companies, PWD offices and PWD Contractors besides several other businesses and individuals in Bengaluru, Mandya, Hassan, Mysuru, Shivamogga and Mangaluru. Raids were also going on Shruthi Motors owned by relatives of Deve Gowda. As of now, it appears that all the raids are linked to the JD(S).There were raids on taluk offices in Kanakapura to search details of the properties of Water Resources Minister DK Shivakumar and his brothermember DK Suresh.There were snap protests in various parts of Mandya district protesting against the I-T raids.Reacting to the raids, Kumaraswamy said, "PM @narendramodi's real surgical strike is out in the open through IT dept raids. The constitutional post offer for IT officer Balakrishna helped the PM in his revenge game. Highly deplorable to use govt machinery, corrupt officials to harass opponents during election time. (sic)''BJP has reacted strongly and asked why the Chief Minister has to worry about the raids. "If they are honest and has not committed any wrongdoings why do they need to worry,'' asked State BJP president BS Yeddyurappa.He further said that since the Chief Minister knew about the raids well in advance, they could have safeguarded.Senior BJP leader KS Eshwarappa termed Kumaraswamy was not qualified to be a Chief Minister. "Kumaraswamy is a misfit. He has passed on the I-T raids information obtained from intelligence officials to the cheats,'' Eshwarappa said.On Wednesday, Kumaraswamy tweeted terming Prime Minister Narendra Modi for misusing the office to target political rivals, "Hon'ble PM @NarendraModiis misusing the Income Tax Dept to threaten the political leaders offrom JDS and Congress during election time. They have planned to conduct IT raids on our important leaders.This is nothing but revenge politics.We will not be cowed down by this.''Irrigation Minister CS Puttaraju, his nephew Ashok and other relativesJD(S) MLC BM FarooqPWD Contractors CHVN Reddy, Timme Reddy, Narayan Gowda, AshwathPWD Offices in Hassan, Executive Engineer Manjunath is being quizzedShruti Motors owned by relatives of Deve Gowda family.
