5 of gang behind abduction of doctor’s son arrested

amansharma@tribunemail.com

Sumedha Sharma

Tribune News Service

Gurugram, March 28

A special task Force headed by IG KK Rao has busted a five-member gang of criminals wanted for a recent abduction of son of a hospital owner after Rs 55 lakh ransom was paid.

The gang which includes notorious proclaimed offenders and a state-level boxer from Uttar Pradesh was active in UP, Rajasthan or Delhi, but had started targeting party hubs in Gurugram owing to abundance of ‘soft targets’.

According to a senior STF official, the gang would lurk around party hubs like Sector 29 or Cyberhub and zero in on a “target” driving a luxury car, having a swanky mobile, either drunk or too carefree or lost and would then abduct him.

They followed the same modus operandi with the doctor’s son.

“The victim had gone to Sector 29 to meet his friends and seeing his big car, the gang members abducted him and held him hostage. They withdrew money with the help of his ATM card and were planning to run away with his car when he revealed his identity. Coming to know that his family is facing threat from another gang, they tried their luck at getting extortion amount and succeeded,” said the investigator.

“We quoted a big amount and it worked. The boy’s father was so scared that he readily agreed to pay ransom,” one of the accused told investigators.

The accused have been identified as the gang kingpin Jogender (34), who was carrying a reward of Rs 50,000; Shiv Kumar (28), Deepak (20), Kamal Malik (19) and Amitesh Chaubey (28), a pro boxer.

According to police, while Chaubey was picked up from Lucknow, all others were nabbed following an encounter in Dharuhera in Rewari. “All members of gang are seasoned criminals and wanted for over 20 cases of robbery, abduction extortion and even murders in four states. Chaubey entered world of crime some eight months back. With this arrest we will cracking many cases,” said IG KK Rao.

Yesterday, Dr SP Yadav, owner of Pushpanjali hospital, had filed an FIR alleging abduction of his son on March 16 and his eventual release after paying Rs 55-lakh ransom.
