Sena’s Raut wants to contest against Somaiya

No candidate yet for Mumbai North East

Shiv Sena legislator Sunil Raut said on Thursday he would fight Kirit Somaiya, the MP from Mumbai North East, if the Bharatiya Janata Party (BJP) gave Mr. Somaiya a seat for the Lok Sabha elections next month.

Despite announcing candidates for all other seats in the State, the BJP has still not announced its candidate for Mumbai North East. Mr. Somaiya had won the 2014 election by defeating the Nationalist Congress Party’s Sanjay Dina Patil. Before the BJP sealed its alliance with the Sena, Mr. Somaiya had made corruption allegations against Sena chief Uddhav Thackeray. After the alliance, the Sena opposed Mr. Somaiya’s candidature, due to which the BJP is yet to arrive at a decision. Even on Tuesday, Sena members opposed Mr. Somaiya’s candidature in a joint meeting with Chief Minister Devendra Fadnavis.

Under pressure from the Sena, the names of other BJP leaders including the newly-inducted Pravin Chheda, Union Minister Piyush Goyal, BJP group leader in the Brihanmumbai Municipal Corporation Manoj Kotak, BJP corporator Parag Shah are rumoured to be in the line of consideration.

On Thursday, Mr. Raut, the Sena MLA from Vikhroli, said, “I am confident that the senior party leadership will not let it come to this [Mr. Somaiya getting the seat]. But if it does, I will contest against him. We are not opposed to the BJP but they should not give him the seat. If the BJP fields anybody else, we will ensure he wins.” Mr. Raut said Mr. Somaiya has harassed Shiv Sainiks for four years. “Somaiya has not maintained any ties with the people of his constituency... We see ‘Matoshree’ [Mr. Thackeray’s residence] as a temple. But if he makes allegations against it and calls [Mr. Thackeray] a mafia don, there cannot even be an attempt to give him a ticket.”

Mr. Raut is the brother of senior Sena leader and MP Sanjay Raut, who did not comment on the matter. “Due to the allegations levelled by Somaiya against Thackeray in the last three to four years, not only the Shiv Sena, but the people of the constituency and all Marathi-speaking people are opposing him. Even if he is given a ticket by mistake, I assure you the BJP will lose the seat,” said Mr. Raut.

There are reports that Mr. Somaiya had recently sought time for a meeting with Mr. Thackeray and Mr. Sanjay Raut, possibly to put an end to the stand-off over his candidature, but both of them had reportedly refused to meet him. “There is no chance. It is impossible,” said a Sena functionary. Mr. Somaiya was not available for comment.

Asked whether he himself would contest the election if Somaiya was given a ticket, he said he had faith that Mr. Thackeray would take a decision that will benefit the Sena and Marathi-speaking people.

(With PTI inputs)
