Ishq Mein Marjawan March 28, 2019 Written Update: Tara and Mohini have a plan; Aarohi gets trapped again

In the previous episode, we see how Aarohi finds Netra and plans to reveal the truth about Deep. Later, Mohini spikes Netra’s drink and Aarohi misses her chance to speak to her. Deep tells Sameer to look at his mobile phone, where he must have received Aarohi’s photo. He tells Sameer to inform Deep if he finds the girl in the party. Aaorhi hands over a letter to a waiter and tells him to give it to Netra. The waiter did not know whom to ask about Netra and gives the letter to Chakor and requests him to give it to Netra. Mohini and Tara waits in their cars outside the venue and avenged to hit Chakor and Netra, whoever comes out first. Chakor sees Netra outside who was about to get hit by the car and saves her just on time, failing Tara and Mohini’s plan.

Chakor informs Deep about the car accident that Netra was about to meet with. Deep takes Netra’s responsibility to look after her as she was high from bhaang. Deep puts Netra to sleep in her room and instructs Shera to guard the room. Tara gets infuriated seeing her plan fail and gets raged seeing Deep’s closeness with Netra. Deep tells Tara about Aarohi’s presence in the party and blames her for lying to him about burning Aarohi’s body. He warns Tara to kill Aarohi and warns her about the consequences to leave her alive. Deep thinks to self that he would never reveal the real reason to marry Netra and hide it from Tara while she thinks that she can no more trust Deep and will stick to her plan of removing Netra from Deep’s life. Vasundhara comes across Aarohi and fakes her affection towards her, requesting her not to be the hurdle in Deep and Netra’s life.

Vasundhara tries to reason out with Aarohi that Deep was no more the same as he was earlier and requests her to forgive him. Later, Netra regains consciousness and finds Aarohi outside. Netra recognised her to be the same girl whose life she had saved earlier and calls for her. Meanwhile, Aarohi finds herself in dilemma whether or not to believe on Vasundhara’s words. Here, Mohini offers Tara to support her in her plan of killing Netra in return for her help to kill Chakor. Not finding any harm to join hands with Mohini, Tara joins her. Mohini makes Tara meet her pet, Jammy, a deadly crocodile and tells her the plan of locking Netra and Chakor inside for him to eat them. Tara finds Mohini’s plan to be fantastic and rejoice to know that she was on the right track.

(ALSO READ: Ishq Mein Marjawan March 27, 2019 Written Update: Aarohi plans to reveal the truth)
