Pakistan should be last country to lecture us on inclusive society: India

India has hit out at Pakistan on its continued support to terror and said Islamabad is "trying to deflect the attention of the financial crisis by mainstreaming terrorist ". Ministry of external affairs spokesperson Raveesh Kumar in a weekly media briefing asked "Why is Pakistan allowing safe haven to a terrorist group?" and questioned the lack of seriousness by Pakistan to take action against Mumbai and Pathankot terror attacks perpetrators. Raveesh Kumar said, "If Pakistan is ready for dialogue, why hasn't Pakistan taken any action against Mumbai and Pathankot terror attack perpetrators? They continue to provide support to the banned terrorist outfits."

On India-Pakistan talks, Raveesh said, "no seriousness in Pakistan's saying it wants dialogue and it (Pakistan) has to back up it up with action"

MEA spokesperson gave examples that how Pakistani ministers have been sharing the stage with terrorist like Hafiz Saeed. In September of 2018, Noor-Ul-Haq Qadri, Pakistan's Federal Minister for Religious Affairs and Inter-faith Harmony and member of the Imran Cabinet shared the stage with 26/11 mastermind Hafiz Saeed and again in December, Minister of State for Interior Shehryar Afridi vowed to protect Hafiz Saeed "as long as Pakistan Tehreek-e-Insaaf is in the government". A prominent leader from PTI also opened Hafiz Saeed's Jammat-ud-Dawah (JuD) centres in Pakistan occupied Kashmir.

JuD is no longer in banned list of a terrorist group with the lapse of the ordinance under which they were put in banned terror groups. Indian Prime Minister Narendra Modi in his first interview of 2019 said New Delhi is open to dialogue with Islamabad but "amid the noise of bombs and guns, the dialogue cannot be heard". Last year at the 10th anniversary of 26/11 Mumbai terror attacks, New Delhi had called on Pakistan to give up "double standards and to expeditiously bring the perpetrators of the horrific attack to justice."

MEA also slammed Pakistan on the issue of raising the so-called poor situation of minorities in India. Raveesh said, "Pakistan said minorities are not treated well in India, I think Pakistan should be the last country to lecture us on plurality and inclusive society. We and the world are fully aware of the situation of minorities in their country."

Last Month Pakistan Prime Minister Imran khan had said," We will show the Modi government how to treat minorities". On the birth anniversary of Jinnah, the founder of Pakistan and the man who partitioned India, he tweeted, "Naya Pak is Quaid's Pak & we will ensure that our minorities are treated as equal citizens, unlike what is happening in India."
