Amit Shah to decide Kirit Somaiya’s poll fate

Kirit Somaiya

Shiv Sena

Amit Shah

Chief Minister Devendra Fadnavis

Sources say BJP top brass is miffed with the MP for criticising Central ministers over policy matters.Sitting BJP MP from Mumbai North Eastmay lose out on a poll ticket this time not only for angering the, but also because the party leadership in Delhi (read) is miffed with him.According to sources, the state BJP has put the ball about Somaiya’s renomination in the party high command’s court. A decision will now be taken by BJP president Shah, who has not taken Somaiya’s criticism of certain Central ministers over some policy issues and the Shiv Sena too kindly.“It is true that the Sena has opposed Somaiya’s nomination, but the BJP top brass is also upset with Somaiya and wants to drop him. However, there is a thin possibility of him getting a chance if he is able to lobby hard. While the decision lies with the party’s top brass,will also have a say,” a senior BJP minister told Mirror.The minister added that Somaiya has ruffled feathers in his party by constantly criticising some key ministers in the Modi government. However, he refused to shed light on the exact bone of contention. “The issue between the Shiv Sena and Somaiya is secondary. The primary issue is between him and the BJP leadership,” he said.The Sena, meanwhile, continued to mount pressure on the BJP to drop Somaiya. On Thursday, Sena legislator Sunil Raut declared that he would fight the elections from Mumbai North East as an Independent if Somaiya is given a ticket by the BJP. “There is an alliance between the BJP and the Sena across the state but if Kirit Somaiya is given a ticket, there will be no alliance in Mumbai North East constituency. How can we help elect someone who has abused our temple? We will work for the alliance but not for him,” Raut said.“If he is given a ticket, I will file my nomination from the seat on April 6. So the BJP must decide now,” Raut added.Hectic lobbying has begun in the BJP for Mumbai North East seat. Former Congress corporator Pravin Chheda, Mulund corporator Manoj Kotak and housing minister Prakash Mehta are vying for the seat, sources said. Chheda, who re-joined the BJP last week, visited Matoshree to meet Shiv Sena president Uddhav Thackeray on Wednesday to lobby for a ticket. However, Uddhav, it is learnt, refused to intervene, calling it an internal matter of the BJP.A senior Sena functionary said that Somaiya was also trying to reach out to Uddhav through Sena secretary Milind Narvekar and Rajya Sabha MP Anil Desai. “He is sending feelers from a lot of people. But Uddhavji has refused to meet him. It’s too late for any courtesies now. Whether to give him a ticket or not is an internal matter of the BJP. The BJP has to decide,” the functionary said.At a meeting of Sena office-bearers on Thursday, Uddhav asked the netas not speak in the public about any matter related to the alliance with BJP. Only the official spokespersons of the party is authorised to speak. Uddhav was referring to Raut’s comments against Somaiya.BJP legislator Prasad Lad also called on Uddhav to sort out differences between Sena and BJP leaders from Ratnagiri. A BJP minister said that Uddhav has asked the BJP to intervene while asking the party leaders in Ratnagiri to help Sena nominee Vinayak Raut. “There is an issue between Raut and leaders such as Bal Mane, Rajan Teli and Pramod Jathar, who are creating problems in campaigning. But the CM has asked them to fall in line and help the alliance candidate. Lad had come to sort out this issue,” a senior Sena functionary said.
