This company in India is extending benefits to its LGBTI employees

A business and financial software company based in Bangalore, India will extend health insurance benefits to the same-sex partners of employees.

According to a new pride and diversity program, employees at Intuit India will be able to enroll same-sex partners as dependents under the company’s medical insurance scheme.

What’s more, the company insurance provides US$1,000 for gender-affirming surgery, according to the Economic Times of India.

Intuit is also one of the first major companies in India to introduce gender-neutral toilets.

Managing Director Sanket Atal told the Economic Times every employee ‘should be able to bring their whole self to work’.

Society slow to act

India’s Supreme Court in September last year ruled the country’s anti-gay law was unconstitutional.

Section 377 of India’s colonial-era Penal Code punished gay sex with up to 10 years in prison. But, the Supreme Court said it violated rights to privacy.

Indians, therefore, celebrated the decriminalization of an estimated 4.5 million LGBTI people.

But, LGBTI activists and leaders warned it would take time for society and businesses to accept homosexuality.

Recently, both Uber and Netflix in India launched LBGTI-friendly campaigns.

Uber India launched a campaign for a rainbow heart emoji. The transportation network company also changed its route map rainbow.

Netflix India, meanwhile, marked Valentine’s Day this year with an adorable romance between two young men

The short film, directed by Reema Sengupta, shows two young men fall in love in an Indian city.

But, Reuters reported last month that while large corporations like Uber were making efforts to become more LGBT-inclusive, smaller firms did not see a need for diversity.

See also

Fewer than half of India’s urban millennials find homosexuality acceptable

India appoints beauty queen to motivate transgender voters

India’s oldest political party mulls LGBTI rights in election manifesto
