Kangana Ranaut's allegations draw Pahlaj Nihalani's ire

MUMBAI: In response to Kangana Ranaut's recent allegations, Producer and former chairperson of the censor board, Pahlaj Nihalani warned her, saying not to "play with me, otherwise I have a lot of things to play with her."

Bollywood's outspoken actor Ranaut recently revealed during her appearance on a show that she was once asked to dress in just a robe for a photoshoot for a Pahlaj Nihalani film.

Rejecting the allegations, Nihalani said that he had spent Rs 15 million on that picture advertisement and shot for three songs. She did the reading post the photoshoot, but "with my advertisement and the poster she got Mahesh Bhatt’s film (Gangster) and backed out of my film as she requested me to let her do Gangster as we were under a three-movie deal."

He also warned the actress of 'Manikarnika: The Queen Of Jhansi', saying, "not play with me, otherwise I have a lot of things to play with her.”

The producer claimed that he had also approached Amitabh Bachchan with a role. “It was a youth film; she was married in that movie. I had approached Amitabh Bachchan for that role. It was on the lines of Cheeni Kum. I gave the narration to Amitji too; he pulled out due to him already doing something similar.

"It was not a porn film and neither am I interested in those kinds of movies," he added.

It is to mention here that Kangana, in hr talks with a media outlet, said that Pahlaj Nihalani had offered her a film called "I Love You Boss," claiming that they had a photoshoot where they gave a robe to wear, adding, "So I just had a satin robe for a show-girl pose, from which I had to stick my leg out, coming out of darkness."

She called the role a soft-porn character, and added: “They should at least have given some tapes. I was supposed to play a young girl lusting after her middle-aged boss. So it was a soft-porn sort of character. And I had this epiphany that I can’t do this. I felt like this is exactly what my parents were talking about. I actually went through the photo shoot, but then I disappeared and changed my number."
