Pakistan is still counting bodies, but Opposition is asking for proof: PM Narendra Modi

On the second day of his electoral campaign, Prime Minister Narendra Modi held rallies in three states where the BJP is yet to emerge as a formidable challenger to the incumbent governments – Odisha, Telangana and Andhra Pradesh.

The PM used the Balakot strike in Pakistan to step up his attack on the Opposition. "Ek mahina ho gaya Pakistan lashein ginney main laga hua hai or yeh saboot maang rahe hain (Since one month, Pakistan is counting corpses and Opposition is asking for proof)," he said in Jeypore of Odisha's Koraput district.

PM Modi sought the blessings from the public for both Lok Sabha elections and state assembly elections that are being held simultaneously. "Ek baar mauka toh dekar dekho"(just give me one chance and see)," he said asking the public to punish the ruling BJD and the Congress.

"This election can fit a double engine for your growth with BJP governments in the Centre and the state," he told the audience.

Odisha is having simultaneous elections for 21 Lok Sabha and 147 assembly seats.

Requesting the crowd to give a standing ovation to armed forces and scientists, Modi said, "People, who have betrayed the poor for seven decades, are so nervous they are constantly insulting the armed forces and scientists. Shouldn't these people be punished?"

In Andhra Pradesh, Modi's sole target was chief minister N Chandrababu Naidu. He rebuked Naidu for pasting his sticker on the PM Kisan scheme calling him "U-turn babu".

In every rally he talked extensive about how Centre's schemes have helped in providing free housing, gas connections, electricity, medical help to the poor sections in the respective states.

"Your servant has been able to build 8 lakh concrete houses for poor families, has distributed 40 lakh gas cylinders to enable smoke-free houses, and electrified 3000 villages," PM Modi said in Jeypore.

He also attacked chief minister Naveen Patnaik for not rolling out the Ayushman Bharat scheme, under which the poor can get free medical assistance across the nation up to a sum of 5 lakh per year.

Attacking K Chandrasekhar Rao's government in Telangana, Modi said,"Their bad intentions have kept the farmers of the state thirsty. Polavaram dam is a symbol of their same intention. The centre has released Rs 7,000 crore. They keep on increasing its cost. This has led to shortage of water."


