Akhilesh says chemistry with Mayawati will defeat BJP

Akhilesh has said the seat-sharing formula with Mayawati's BSP may not be announced tomorrow.

Speaking exclusively to India Today, Samajwadi Party (SP) chief Akhilesh Yadav said the Samajwadi Party-Bahujan Samaj Party (BSP) arithmetic has always been strong and that the alliance's chemistry will destroy BJP in Uttar Pradesh.

"From demonetisation to every step, the poor have been betrayed. The alliance is to bring a government for the poor, not to dethrone anyone. Announcement of alliance is going to happen and we will express our views in front of the media. This is not an alliance borne out of fear.The SP-BSP arithmetic was strong now the chemistry will defeat BJP. We have learnt about coalition from the BJP," Akihlesh Yadav said.

Akhilesh hit out at PM Modi saying PM Modi brought parties and leaders together and Yadav himself had learnt from that. "BJP has taught us how to gain power and fix our arithmetic. Farmers have not been given any benefit under his government. Lohia and Ambedkar wanted to work together. The majority in this country is unhappy with this government," Akhilesh told India Today.

"It's because of alliance we were able to outflank BJP from the CM and Deputy CM's seats. BJP tried to spread poison in Kairana but couldn't succeed.

Clearing the air of any alliance with Congress, Akhilesh said tomorrow's announcement will only be about an alliance between SP and BSP. He did however say that it was up to the Congress to decide on an alliance.

He said a seat sharing formula may not be announced tomorrow and the Congress was not in a strong position in Uttar Pradesh. He said Congress has gained in some states especially where the party has won in the assembly polls.

Akhilesh said a state specific alliance was needed to defeat BJP and that all opposition parties should focus on making a strong alliance to counter BJP.

Speaking on him or Mayawati as aspirants to the PM's chair, Akhilesh Yadav said he wil be happy if the next PM came from Uttar Pradesh.

Speaking about the charges against him, he said that the CBI probe against him was done deliberately and at the behest of the BJP's top brass.
