NC, PDP rebuff Jaitley on Art 35A

editorial@tribune.com

Azhar Qadri

Tribune News Service

Srinagar, March 29

A day after Union Finance Minister Arun Jaitley made a case against Article 35A and blamed it for hampering the economic development of Jammu and Kashmir, two leading parties in the region said the special status had protected the state and warned against any tinkering with the law.

The National Conference (NC) and Peoples Democratic Party (PDP), the two main political parties in the state which have governed the state in different coalitions for most of the time in the last five decades, came out vociferously in defence of the state’s special status.

Omar, who called a press conference in the city here to rebuff Jaitley’s claim against Article 35A which guarantees the state’s special status and bars non state-subjects from buying land and availing employment in the state, said the law had saved the state from poverty.

“We are not the victims of 35A, 35A gave us protection. If 35A had not protected us, there would have been poverty...compared to entire country, the levels of abject poverty is less in J&K,” said Omar, who is the vice-president of the National Conference.

The Article has been in the eye of a political storm since a petition filed in the Supreme Court sought the abrogation of the law and ignited fear among separatists as well as mainstream political parties that such a move will cause a demographic change in the state.

“We have been saying it for long that the state’s special identity and position is in danger…the danger increased in last five years and since 2015 when the BJP formed the government in the state,” Omar said.

He said the Union Finance Minister’s claim yesterday was “more evidence” of the threat to the state’s special status. “The reality has been distorted and wrong perception given that Jammu and Kashmir is in loss because of its special position … the reality is that the entire state, including Jammu, Kargil and Ladakh, has benefited from the special status,” Omar said.

“The state has faced losses not because of the special status, but because of militancy. Before militancy, there was no problem. Before 1989, Jammu and Kashmir was considered the fastest-growing state. There was no such industry which was not found in the state,” he said.

Omar warned that any debate on Article 35A and a related law under Article 370 would also open the question of the accession of the state with the Union of India, describing it as a “negotiated settlement”.

The PDP of former Chief Minister Mehbooba Mufti also reacted sternly to Union Finance Minister’s claim against Article 35A and warned the BJP that it was trying to convert constitutional relationship between Jammu and Kashmir and the Union “into an occupation”.
