‘Art adds to your happiness without wealth’

How do you feel after getting the forest conservation award?

You depict life in dead wood. From where did you learnt the art?

From a government employee to teacher to an artist, you have changed your profession. Why?

How has your art influenced lives of people?

What exactly do you want to tell society through art?

Were you criticized by family and friends for your unconventional interest?

You have been in

for so many years, what have you gained from forests?

What do you think of Tadoba?

Any message for young generation?

What do you feel about life at 87?

A specialist designer in timber and bamboo art, Chandrapur-based Manohar Sapre (87) has a symbiotic relationship with forests. A multifaceted personality, Sapre is a teacher-turned artist, who breathes life into wood . A writer, thinker, philosopher and a cartoonist, he has spread awareness about flora and fauna through his art. Sapre is so passionate about the art that his entire house has been converted into an art gallery. His art and craft work has been exhibited in France and USA.Sapre, who worked as newspaper cartoonist for 40 years, had well-known cartoonist RK Laxman, playwright Vijay Tendulkar, accomplished Marathi writer PL Deshpande (Pu. La) and later actor Nargis Dutt among many others as his admirers. His name also figures in Penguin Book of Indian Cartoons.Sapre has creative interest in visual art and reading classics and has 10 published books to his credit. On March 22, he was conferred with the Late Uttamrao Patil Memorial Forest Conservation Award-2019. TOI talked to him about his achievements and his views on war with environment and forests.Excerpts from the interview...Quite naturally, elated. In a way, it is society’s recognition to my work in a very unusual art that coveys a convincing message that in forests nothing is waste as such. For the people, it gives an understanding that creativity has no bounds provided there is will and skill.My wood art is not new as such, the novelty is in its variation. In other words, I’m doing the same thing differently like painting! In my technique, sculpting is comparatively less because I have to preserve the original form of timber waste to the best extent possible. It is as if I am asking the natural piece of wood “what do you want to become” rather than I wanting to make one object. I have developed and invented my own work culture and technique. In short, it is infusing meaning where it does not exist.The government job and teachership were comfortable and financially assuring, yet were lacking a challenge. My psyche is genetically conditioned to accepting and even creating challenges. Therefore, I treat every problem as an opportunity and accept it as a challenge. This style has given me a precious totally self-governed free life, though less luxurious.In the field of art there are giants who have left footprints on life. In my moderate way I too tried to emulate these with some success. For example, while propagating art as such I have attempted to design unique decorative pieces and interior accessories out of timber waste and bamboo. This experiment helped many aspiring craftsmen to get employment in a novel eco-friendly way. This little achievement gave me a deep satisfaction giving something back to the society.My creative novelty is to convey to the society a bit of its psycho-philosophical fallout in terms of creative happiness vis-vis the contemporary consumerism that is haunting and hurting humanity under the garb of a new globalized uniculture, the postulate of which is that ‘happiness grows in proportion with money’. This premise is blatantly false. I feel there are many more ways like art which add to your happiness without wealth. Through my attempt at creativity, I humbly tried to buttress this conviction.Initially, most of my friends were sceptical about my newfound craze for wood art, and wife too was ‘wild’ because I was spoiling her home decor by spreading my odd raw material all over. As time went by, I went on improvising my art and those who chided me were finally awed by it. Now my wife too is more than happy because her house is a celebrated art gallery visited by celebrities.Originally, I am from an obscure place called Mamulwadi near Shegaon . Like wood, I drifted here for jobs in the 60s. My art gallery gives me the feeling of belonging to Chandrapur. In the same vein people here too accepted me as a son of the soil. Forests around here provide me the much-needed environmental warmth, which is so vital for inner life.I love its wilderness. I have been seeing it since 1960. For years I’ve have been associated with officials working for the development of the park, particularly publicity, slogans, messages and bill boards. Tadoba has a huge lake in core area which is full of crocodiles. Park authorities had put one huge board cautioning ‘swimming totally prohibited’. I added a few words to it — ‘survivors will be prosecuted’.I would tell them to keep away from extreme competition for money. Try to live life, do not try to encash it all the while. Identify your hidden talents which nature has implanted in you by birth. Every artist may not be a unique man, but every man is a unique artist.From my end I lived life in two contrasting halves. While the earlier learner segment was tramp like miserable and confused, the later one was made wiser and richer in terms of blessed joy and equanimity. This metamorphosis of my person can be better summed up in the following revealing world of Robert Frost: I shall be telling this with a sigh/Somewhere ages and ages hence:/Two roads diverged in a wood,/And I... took the road less travelled by,/And that has made all the difference.
