172 complaints of poll code violation

editorial@tribune.com

Bhanu P Lohumi

Tribune News Service

Shimla, March 30

With the filing of nominations yet to begin, the Election Commission has received 172 complaints of violation of code of conduct till March 29 of which 119 have been received by the state Chief Electoral Office (CEO) while 63 marked to district returning officers.

Eight complaints, sent to the Election Commission of India, have been referred to the CEO for inquiry while the Opposition Congress has filed 12 complaints followed by nine complaints by the ruling BJP and one complaint each by the CPM and BSP. The maximum number of 80 complaints have been made through the public. Of 109 complaints received by the CEO, 51 have been disposed of and remaining 58 are under consideration.

Of 63 complaints received by district returning officers, 33 have been disposed of while 30, pertaining to Kangra (8), Mandi (7) Hamirpur (5), Solan and Una (4) each and Shimla (2) are being looked into.

Shyam Saran Negi (102) from Kalpa, the first voter of Independent India, had complained that his photograph and name was being used by a BJP leader on the social media prefixing chowkidar in his name and seeking vote for Prime Minister Narendra Modi. He said he had not authorised any political party or individual except the government to use his name.

The Congress had made a complained against the Speaker for attending BJP meetings and said it was the violation of poll code while the BJP had filed a complaint with the State Election Commission against the fake video uploaded on official Twitter handle of the Himachal Congress, showing transport union leader being beaten by the public as BJP MLA.

Most complaints are of general nature like government officials working for political parties and non-removal of posters and hoardings, said CEO Devesh Kumar, adding that no complaint regarding the use of Army personnel for electoral gains had been received.

The government had warned its employees against posting campaign material in favour of any political party or leader on the social media.
