LS Election 2019: 'What message does this convey?' Yechury reacts to Rahul contesting against LDF in Wayanad

LS Election 2019: 'What message does this convey?' Yechury reacts to Rahul contesting against LDF in Wayanad

Ending all speculations, Congress on Sunday announced that party President Rahul Gandhi has decided to contest from Wayanad constituency in Kerala. There was intense speculation regarding whether Congress President will fight from two seats earlier.

On Sunday, senior Congress leader AK Anthony said: "Rahul ji has given his consent to contest from two seats, very happy to inform you that he will also contest from Wayanad in Kerala."

Alongside, Wayanad, Rahul will be also contesting from Amethi, which he has won since 2004. Earlier Amethi Congress had passed a resolution urging Rahul Gandhi to also contest from South India like Indira and Sonia Gandhi has done in the past.

BJP President Amit Shah reacted to the development accusing Rahul Gandhi of using politics of polarisation to win from Kerala.

Congress is fighting 16 out of 20 seats in Kerala. The rest seats have being given to allies which are part of UDF in Kerala. The party although out of power in Kerala hopes to do well in the Lok Sabha election in the state and Rahul Gandhi's presence is likely to be a big boost to the campaign. Incidentally decision comes at a day when Rahul Gandhi is campaigning in Andhra Pradesh and Karnataka.

Congress had earlier said that many leaders from South Indian states of Kerala, Tamil Nadu and Karnataka have urged Rahul Gandhi to contest from their states and the party is positively considering their request.

Wayanad is a constituency which has come into existence in 2009. Congress has won the seat both times. Rahul Gandhi will be up against PP Suneer of CPI. BJP is yet to declare their candidate. Left has reacted strongly to Rahul Gandhi standing from Wayanad.

Prakash Karat said, " To pick a candidate like Rahul Gandhi against Left means that Congress is going to target the Left in Kerala. This is something which we will strongly oppose & in this election we will work to ensure the defeat of Rahul Gandhi in Wayanad."
