PLFI, criminals in Sundargarh thrive in absence of proper patrolling

Nuagaon: Cashing in on alleged poor police patrolling, the People’s Liberation Front of India (PLFI) has reportedly intensified its activities in Nuagaon block under Biramitrapur Assembly constituency in Sundargarh district whose 15 panchayats share borders with Jharkhand.

Common people have expressed concern that the police have not taken patrolling seriously at the border areas, known for the notorious activities of PLFI.

In March last year, PLFI members shot dead a youth named Haridarshan Sahu at Bagdega weekly market near Nuagaon Bisra in broad daylight. Although one year has passed since the murder, the police are still clueless about the miscreants.

Similarly, some miscreants opened fire at one Bharat Mahato at Sarubahal and fled the spot. This incident is still shrouded in mystery.

Such incidents should have prompted the beefing up of security arrangements in this part of the district, the local residents pointed out. They also informed that criminals from Jharkhand have also entered the locality and are indulged in nefarious activities. Locals alleged that these criminals are involved in the Bagdega Haridarshan firing incident.

Sources said, the criminals from outside the state are influencing the job-less here and wooing them to their fold. They turn into informants for the Red rebels as well as the other criminals. Contractors and businessmen are said to be the soft targets of the inter-state criminals and PLFI. They collect hefty ransoms from them.

Notably, a fierce gun fight ensued between DVF force and PLFI members at Aarahansa jungle near Chitapedi panchayat under Bisra police limits of Nuagaon block February 9, 2017 before the 2017 panchayat elections. While two PLFI members were killed in the exchange, more than six members escaped into the dense jungle. ASI Sunil Kumar Nanda of Bisra police also sustained injury in the gun battle.

However, since the face-off PLFI activities had gone down in the locality. Recently however, it is on the rise again.

Patrolling these areas, however, is difficult as the nearest outpost, the Bisra Police Station is 35 kilometres away.

Locals have urged the police and the administration to intensify patrolling and implement safety arrangements to stave off any untoward incident in the run-up to the Lok Sabha and Assembly elections.

PNN
