Rahul Gandhi to contest from Wayanad: Sitaram Yechury asks Congress to explain its decision

Rahul Gandhi to contest from Wayanad: Sitaram Yechury asks Congress to explain its decision: Sitaram Yechury on Sunday asked Congress to explain the intention behind its decision of fielding party president from Wayanad parliamentary seat. He also said that it was their priority to remove ruling BJP party in the upcoming Lok Sabha elections.

Rahul Gandhi to contest from Wayanad: Sitaram Yechury asks Congress to explain its decision: Communist Party of India (Marxist) general secretary Sitaram Yechury on Sunday said that Congress has to explain to people what message they want to convey after fielding Rahul Gandhi from Kerala’s Wayanad Lok Sabha seat. The CPI (M) leader said that any party can decide which candidate would contest from which seat but Congress has to explain the intention behind its decision. Yechury’s comments came few hours after Congress announced that its president would fight from Wayanad along with Amethi in Uttar Pradesh.

The CPI (M) general secretary said that the upcoming Lok Sabha election is important that would decide whether a secular democracy would survive or not. He made it clear that removing BJP from the government is LDF’s top priority.

S Yechury on Rahul Gandhi contesting from Wayanad: Coming here&fighting against LDF, what message this conveys, that Congress has to decide. Any party can decide which candidate will contest from which seat but what's the message they want to convey,they'll have to explain to ppl https://t.co/Y0szfX0Gwy — ANI (@ANI) March 31, 2019

CPI(M) General Secretary Sitaram Yechury on Rahul Gandhi contesting from Wayanad: We are very clear, this election is an important one, that will decide whether a secular democracy will survive or not. Removing BJP is our priority. pic.twitter.com/0yrW59b5UW — ANI (@ANI) March 31, 2019

The announcement of Gandhi’s candidature from Wayanda did not go well with the CPI (M)-led LDF in Kerala. Reacting to Congress’ decision, Kerala chief minister Pinarayi Vijayan vowed to defeat Gandhi from Wayanad. He said that Gandhi’s contest is against Left. Vijayan asserted that the Congress president should have contested from a seat where BJP if fighting.

Opposing Gandhi’s bid from Wayanad, senior CPI (M) leader Prakash Karat said that Congress is going to target the Left in Kerala. He made it clear that they would work hard to ensure Gandhi’s defeat. Karat went on to say that Gandhi’s candidature from Wayanad shows the party’s priority is to fight against Left.

Earlier, the BJP had fielded Union Minister Smriti Irani from Amethi. She had said that sitting MP from Amethi is seeking support from Akhilesh Yadav and Mayawati, which shows where Congress stands. In the last election, Smriti had to taste a defeat at the hands of Congress president by more than 1 lakh votes. But this time, she seems to be confident enough in her fight against Gandhi.

Amethi is considered as the stronghold of Congress as its president has emerged victorious from this seat thrice in 2004, 2009 and 2014 Lok Sabha polls. In 1999, UPA chairperson Sonia Gandhi had also won Amethi.

Meanwhile, Wayanad is one of the 20 Lok Sabha seats in Kerala. The seat was held by M I Shanavas in 2009 and 2014 parliamentary polls. But after Shanavas’s death in November 2018, the seat was lying vacant.

For all the latest National News, download NewsX App
