Naidu warns public against voting for YSRCP

‘All sections are happy with performance of TDP govt.’

Calling upon the people not to cast their vote to the Opposition YSR Congress Party, Chief Minister and TDP president N. Chandrababu Naidu on Sunday alleged that the State would become a hub of anti-social elements if the YSRCP was voted to power in the elections.

“Leader of the Opposition Y.S. Jagan Mohan Reddy is behind the torching of Ratnachal Express train on the sidelines of the Kapu Aikya Garjana public meeting. Do you want to cast your vote for his party?” Mr. Naidu asked the public while addressing a public meeting on the Rajah Grounds at Tuni.

Foreseeing a pro-TDP wave all over the State, Mr. Naidu said that it would be difficult for the YSRCP candidates to get their deposits. “I have distributed ‘Pauspu-Kumkuma’ to one crore women and fulfilled all the promises made to the Kapus. Justice has been rendered to the BCs by way of 5% reservations and the farmers are benefitfed from the loan waiver,” he said, exuding confidence that all those sections would cast their vote only to the TDP.

Mr. Naidu said that the youngsters were happy with the increased employment opportunities and more and more jobs would be generated in the days to come. “Both the YSRCP and the BJP are trying to hatch a conspiracy against me. But, I have no worries, as I am enjoying your full support. You should teach a lesson to Telangana Chief Minister K. Chandrasekhar Rao, who is trying to involve in our State issues,” he said.

Ridicules Jagan on Kia

Special Correspondent from Visakhapatnam adds: Mr. Naidu has said that he has no objection to Mr. Jagan Mohan Reddy being subservient to Prime Minister Narendra Modi but will not tolerate if the YSRCP chief deceives Andhra Pradesh.

Referring to the statements of Mr. Reddy that Mr. Modi was responsible for setting up of Kia Motors at Anantapur, Mr. Naidu said the YSRCP chief was trying to please the Prime Minister in a bid to escape from the CBI cases pending against him.

Taking credit for the tremendous growth of the IT sector in Hyderabad, Mr. Naidu said that he had the vision to develop Visakhapatnam, Kakinada, Rajamahendravaram, Eluru on similar lines. A beautiful four-lane beach road could be developed from Itchapuram in Srikakulam district to Tada in Nellore district.

“Once the road is developed, the world will come to us. Investments will pour in and employment can be generated,” he said speaking on his vision to develop the State. Referring to the appeal of the YSRCP chief to the voters to give him a chance, Mr. Naidu asked the crowd: “Can we place our future at his feet?” Shall we vote for him to save him from going to jail?”
