ETMarkets Morning Podcast: Equity MF fees get cheaper; Jet lenders float new rescue plan & more

Transcript

Hello There! Good Morning. I am Tanisha Sharma from ETMarkets.com, and here is all the news you need to start your day







The Headlines:



> Relief for D-Street as MSCI puts off index rejig



> Economists, analysts vote for 25 bps rate cut



> Equity mutual funds get cheaper from today



AND



> NSE, SGX ink deal on Nifty futures contracts





And We have a lot more. Stay with us.



Let’s first have a quick glance at how the markets are looking like...it looks like a promising start is not on the cards today.



>> Asian stocks rose on Monday, as signs of progress in US-China trade talks and firmer Wall Street shares supported sentiment. Australian stocks climbed 0.85 per cent, South Korea’s KOSPI 1.1 per cent and Japan’s Nikkei 1.6 per cent.





BACK HOME, LOOKS LIKE NIFTY IS HEADING FOR A NEGATIVE START



>> Nifty futures on Singapore Exchange traded 45 points higher, indicating a good start for Dalal Street



MEANWHILE



The rupee appreciated by 16 paise on Friday to close at 69.14 against the US dollar on persistent foreign fund inflows and heavy buying in domestic equities.



LET ME NOW quickly GO OVER the top news we are tracking this morning.



Relief for India as MSCI puts off move on GDRs & ADRs



In a big relief to the Indian markets, MSCI has deferred its decision to exclude the shares being offered through GDRs, ADRs while calculating foreign ownership limits, the measures that could have led over $1 billion outflow of overseas funds from India. Hectic negotiations between Indian government officials and MSCI have led the global index provider to postpone its decision



Economists, analysts expect RBI to cut rate



RBI is likely to reduce the cost of money for the second time in as many months as mounting concerns over a global economic slowdown, particularly in the US, and its impact on the emerging markets make investors rather wary of fresh investments into capital assets. According to an ET survey of 26 market participants, an overwhelming majority expect a quarter percentage point reduction in the repo, when the central bank concludes its monetary policy review on Thursday.



Equity mutual funds get cheaper from today

Equity-oriented mutual funds are set to get cheaper from Monday. With new fee slabs that investors pay to remain invested in mutual funds setting in, the dynamics for the mutual fund industry is set to change. Equity schemes with bigger assets under management will become cheaper, while investors will have to pay a higher cost for the smaller ones.



NSE, SGX reach deal on Nifty contracts

NSE and the Singapore Exchange have finalised an agreement that will result in trades done in Nifty and Bank Nifty futures contracts in the island nation being executed in International Financial Services Centre, Gift City, Gujarat. Both the exchanges have submitted their plans to the capital market regulators of India and Singapore and are expecting clearance in next one month.



Jet floats new plan to fund airline

Lenders to Jet Airways are proposing a new plan that will fund the stricken airline through a rights issue with existing promoters and partners renouncing a portion of their stake in favour of new investors. Under the proposal, which is being discussed internally, the airline will raise Rs 5,135 crore through equity infusion by two new investors. The pilots’ union of India’s troubled Jet Airways said on Sunday it will give the carrier’s new management two weeks to clear unpaid salaries, deferring its plan to take strike action.



LET’S ALSO HAVE A QUICK LOOK AT SOME OF THE STOCKS MAKING NEWS THIS MORNING



>> Majority of lenders to Essar Steel have voted in favour of giving Rs 1,000 crore more to operational creditors as part of a settlement offered by ArcelorMittal, but rejected Standard Chartered’s claims for a higher amount, which may further delay resolution in the 21 month-old insolvency case.



>> KKR and Singapore's GIC are monetising part of their holdings worth about Rs 3,472 crore in India’s largest mortgage lender HDFC through secondary market transactions



>> Mindtree is seeking a “common middle ground” with L&T that will benefit shareholders of both companies, its chairman said



>> Ahead of Vodafone Idea’s $3.6 billion rights issue, Kumar Mangalam Birla is reorganising unlisted group companies to raise funds. Birla Carbon is set to buy a controlling interest in Swiss Singapore Overseas Enterprises for $450 million.



>> NBCC is open to acquiring more distressed assets in the real estate sector, provided there are no corporate governance issues, its chairman said.



LASTLY,



Oil prices rose on Monday, adding to gains in the first quarter when the major benchmarks posted their increases in nearly a decade. Brent futures rose by 34 cents to $67.92 a barrel and WTI rose by 30 cents to $60.44
