Congress Observes Black Day against Merger of Vijaya Bank and Fooling People of DK

Congress Observes Black Day against Merger of Vijaya Bank and Fooling People of DK

Mangaluru: The District Congress staged a protest against the merger of Vijaya Bank with the Bank of Baroda and Dena Bank in front of Vijaya Bank Mallikatta Branch here on April 1.

Addressing the protesters Former MLA J R Lobo said, “Today it is a black day for the people of Dakshina Kannada because today the Vijaya bank which was running on profit has been merged with the Bank of Baroda and Dena Bank that are running on loss. In our district, there are 7 MLAs and it was their duty to stop the merger of Vijaya Bank but they have not put any efforts to do so. Today the BJP MLAs and MP of DK are responsible for the elimination of Vijaya Bank. In the coming days, we will fight back to reverse the merger. BJP is against the people of DK, they have not taken any measures to create jobs. There is a lobby behind putting up advertisements hoardings of the merger of Bank of Baroda and Vijaya Bank. The BJP put allegations on Chidambaram but today they have spoiled the culture of DK and merged the bank which was founded by a Mangalorean with the Gujarat based bank.”

Former minister Ramanath Rai said, “The bank was started by a social activist A Balakrishna Shetty on Vijaya Dashami who had dreamt to transform the bank into a job-creating bank and provide jobs to the youth of Dakshina Kannada. According to the Narasimhan Committee, the banks which are running in loss should be merged with banks that are running on profit. As per that, the banks which were in the loss were merged with the State bank of India. Today the Vijaya Bank which is running on profit has been merged with banks running on loss, so we observe this day as a black day. Vijaya Bank is a national bank and has provided jobs to thousands of people. But after merging the bank Sundaram Shetty’s portrait has been discarded.”

Ramanath Rai further said, “Vijaya Bank employees had met Rahul Gandhi to stop the merger and Rahul has assured to reverse the merger if he comes to power. Our MP candidate Mithun Rai has also assured that if he wins the elections he will fight in the parliament to reverse the merger of Vijaya Bank. If they still want to merge, let they merge the Bank of Baroda and Dena Bank with Vijaya Bank. We all should forget party differences and fight to reverse the merger of Vijaya Bank”.

Addressing the protesters MP Candidate Mithun Rai said, “The Vijaya Bank has become the victim of dictatorship. Today April 1, is a black day for the people of DK because the bank which was started in 1931 by A B Shetty which is a reputed bank has been merged by the NDA government with the Gujarat based bank. Our MP Nalin during a press meet had assured the people of DK to stop the merger. Today April 1, we call it a fools day. Our MP in front of the media had assured of retaining the Vijaya Bank but he had lied and fooled the people of DK. We all should take the pledge to reverse the merger of Vijaya Bank. Today we are symbolically protesting against the merger of Vijaya Bank in front of the branch. We will fight till we get justice, the employees of Vijaya Bank are in tears and their tears will turn into a curse for the BJP.”
