India Ka DNA: My fight against Rahul Gandhi in Amethi not personal, it's against corruption & dynasty, says Smriti Irani

Union Minister Smriti Irani on Monday expressed confidence that Prime Minister Narendra Modi will return to power when the results of Lok Sabha elections 2019 are announced on May 23.

Speaking at the 'India ka DNA' conclave of Zee News, the Minister of Textile in the NDA government said, "The factor in 2019 is that voters want Modi as PM again. Modi will once again become the pradhan sewak on May 23."

Irani, who is contesting against Rahul Gandhi from Amethi in Uttar Pradesh, said it will be her biggest achievement when Congress president loses Amethi on May 23.

The minister said that her fight against Rahul Gandhi is not personal but against corruption, dynasty and an ideology.

"BJP is contesting from Amethi and I am just a representative. My fight against Rahul Gandhi is not personal. The fight is against an ideology," she said. "Our fight is against corruption and dynasty. It is not against Rahul."

She said the Congress chief is contesting from two seats - Amethi in UP and Wayanad in Kerala - because he is not sure of winning from his traditional seat.

"Why is Congress president fighting from two seats if there is no Modi wave? The leader who is not sure of winning from his stronghold is talking about there being no Modi wave," she said.

She further said, "Congress workers in Amethi asked Rahul to contest from a second seat as they are not sure of winning. So he is looking for a safe seat. He won by just over 1 lakh vote. Amethi voters want development, and BJP cadre has worked a lot. Congress did not win a single Assembly seat in the 2017 Assembly election. Jaisi karni waisi bharni."

Further attacking Rahul Gandhi, she said the Congress president does not have the calibre to work for India's development.

" I come from a very simple family and not a royal family. India's DNA has changed. There is no competition between a simple person and a dynast. India's DNA has always been about hardworking people, respecting women, development," she said.

On controversy around Modi's announcement on Anti-Satellite missile test, she asked why the prime minister of the country should not make the announcement on massive achievement like ASAT missile.

"The opposition is just trying to ensure that Indians are not proud of the achievements of the scientists and others," she said.

On what would be the major factor in 2019 Lok Sabha polls, Irani said, "The factor in 2019 is that voters want Modi as PM again."
