Avengers: Endgame director says he loved the camera work in Salman Khan's Dabangg

Salman Khan's Dabangg | Photo Credit: YouTube

One of the Russo brothers, is in India for promoting the upcoming Avengers: Endgame. While Joe Russo has been talking about one of the biggest climaxes of the Marvel Cinematic Universe, he even shared how he watches Bollywood movies. From working with Priyanka Chopra to inspiring a scene from Rajinikanth’s Endhiran for Avengers: Age Of Ultron, Russo opened up during his India tour.

Today, AR Rahman’s composition of the Marvel Anthem in Hindi released for which the director was present at the music maestro shared a photograph with him in Mumbai. During a press conference that was held earlier today, Russo shared how he watched action movie Dabangg and loved the camera work in the film. Being an action filmmaker, Russo, who is known for Captain America: The Winter Soldier and Captian America: Civil War, said, “I haven’t gotten around to seeing Dabanng 2 yet.”

View this post on Instagram A post shared by Salman Khan (@beingsalmankhan) on Sep 10, 2018 at 7:16am PDT

Avengers: Endgame will see one of the most powerful villains Thanos wage a war against the original Avengers starring Chris Evans aka Captain America, Robert Downey Jr aka Iron Man, Scarlett Johansson as Black Widow, Chris Hemsworth as Thor, Mark Ruffalo as the Hulk and Jeremy Renner aka Hawkeye.

The Mad Titan who has already confiscated all the six infinity stones, has wiped off half of the planet’s population. With several prominent characters declared dead in Avengers: Infinity War including Black Panther, Spiderman and Doctor Strange, Avengers: Endgame has surely pumped up the excitement about the movie where a possible death of a superhero has been hinted.

The film will also see the return of Carol Danvers aka Captain Marvel, played Brie Larson, who is considered Marvel’s most powerful superhero. Captain Marvel, along with the Avengers, will fight with the against Thanos, played by Josh Brolin. The trailer also shared a glimpse of Ant-Man who was last seen in Ant-Man And The Wasp who was stuck in the Quantum realm. Avengers: Endgame is slated to release worldwide on April 26.
