I'd love to work with Priyanka Chopra: Avengers Endgame director talks about working with an Indian actor

Priyanka Chopra | Photo Credit: Instagram

While the trailer of Avengers: Endgame has put us into a frenzy, one of the Russo brothers has arrived in India for the promotional campaign of the upcoming Marvel Cinematic Universe movie. Joe Russo talked about Bollywood and spilled some beans about the Avengers films. The director who previosuly worked on Captian America: The Winter Soldier and Captain America: Civil War, replaced Joss Whedon, who had earlier directed Avengers: Age Of Ultron, for Avengers: Infinity War alongside Anthony Russo.

Joe talked about how he had a passion for action movies and was asked if he watched films like Dabangg. At an event, he said that he loved the camera work in the 2010 Salman Khan movie. Sharing about which Indian actor he would like to work with Priyanka Chopra. “I’d love to work with Priyanka,” he said, “I’m smiling only because we’re potentially talking to her about something, I’m just not going to say what yet.”

Avengers: Endgame will see one of the most powerful villains Thanos wage a war against the original Avengers starring Chris Evans aka Captain America, Robert Downey Jr aka Iron Man, Scarlett Johansson as Black Widow, Chris Hemsworth as Thor, Mark Ruffalo as the Hulk and Jeremy Renner aka Hawkeye.

The Mad Titan who has already confiscated all the six infinity stones, has wiped off half of the planet’s population. With several prominent characters declared dead in Avengers: Infinity War including Black Panther, Spiderman and Doctor Strange, Avengers: Endgame has surely pumped up the excitement about the movie where a possible death of a superhero has been hinted.

The film will also see the return of Carol Danvers aka Captain Marvel, played Brie Larson, who is considered Marvel’s most powerful superhero. Captain Marvel, along with the Avengers, will fight with the against Thanos, played by Josh Brolin. The trailer also shared a glimpse of Ant-Man who was last seen in Ant-Man And The Wasp who was stuck in the Quantum realm. Avengers: Endgame is set to release on April 26.

On the work front, Priyanka will be seen next in Shonali Bose's The Sky Is Pink co-starring Farhan Akhtar, Zaira Wasim and Rohit Saraf.
