No power can abrogate Art 370: Mir - Jammu Kashmir Latest News

Excelsior Correspondent

SRINAGAR, Apr 1: Congress today said that no power on earth can abrogate the Article 370 and 35A, saying that these promises were made in the previous elections as well.

Jammu and Kashmir Pradesh Congress Committee (JKPCC) president, Ghulam Ahmad Mir while addressing a press conference here at party headquarters said that Article 370 is the only bridge between the State and Union of India, therefore no power on earth can even think of abrogating it.

The Congress president was reacting to Amit Shah’s statement that Article 370 and 35A will be abrogated by 2020. “Promises to abrogate Article 370 and 35A were made in the past as well but people are well aware about such stunts and won’t get trapped in it,” he said.

Mir said that BJP was ruling the country but failed to abrogate it for last five years, now they are trying to befool the people once again to gain votes.

He said that there is no alliance between Congress and NC but NC to ensure the secular votes are not divided have decided not to field any candidate from two Jammu constituencies and Congress in return decided not to field any candidate against NC president Dr. Farooq Abdullah.

“We will highlight our achievement before the people and will not speak against the other parties,” he said, adding that Congress party for the wellbeing of youth and people will put forth its agenda and hopefully they will help the party’s candidate from the constituency to emerge victorious.

On the occasion, Jammu and Kashmir Zamindar Forum, also announced that it will support Congress candidates in the upcoming elections.

“Congress has a similar agenda towards farmers and labourers, therefore, the organization has decided to support the party in upcoming polls so that the genuine demands of people will be fulfilled,” the forum said.

Jammu and Kashmir Zamindar Forum led by its President Abdul Hamid Malik called on JKPCC President at Congress party headquarters and had a wide-ranging discussions over the difficulties confronting farmers in the State especially in Kashmir and other regions in the State.

It was resolved in the meeting that JK Zamindar Forum and Congress party will fight for the rights of farmers.

Mir assured the forum that Congress party would take every measure to redress the grievances of the farmers. He said that Congress party feels highly concerned about the farmer’s pathetic condition across the country and will do everything to bring respite to farmers.
