Delhi: Jaish-e-Mohammed on the run since 2015 held

NEW DELHI: A Jaish-e-Mohammed terrorist on the run since his conviction by Delhi high court in 2015 was finally arrested by Delhi Police’s Special Cell . Police had been tracking Fayaz Ahmad Lone since then, but the trail had gone cold once he reached Srinagar and rejoined the JeM cadre.The cops were alerted to some Jaish cadres planning an attack on Delhi and swung into action. DCP (Special Cell) Sanjeev Kumar Yadav said the investigators found that the three JeM men had been in touch with Pakistan and Kashmir-based JeM commanders and receiving orders for the next hit.The 40-year-old resident of Kupwara was arrested by a team led by ACP Sanjay Dutt and inspector Rahul on Monday. Sources said that the police teams are now hunting for two of Lone’s associates, Bashir Ahmad Maulvi and Abdul Majeed Baba, both of whom are residents of Sopore in Kashmir.DCP Yadav added that Lone and three others, among them their Pakistan-based commander, had earlier been arrested with arms, ammunition and explosives in 2007. But when they went off the grid four years ago after their conviction, Delhi high court issued non-bailable warrants against Lone and his two associates. Lone was believed to have become part of a sleeper cell providing the active JeM cadres with logistical support.Lone was in the Jaish squad that reached Delhi on February 4, 2007 on the Malwa Express with the intent to carry out an attack in the capital. The disembarked at the New Delhi Railway Station at 9pm and walked to the Ranjeet Singh flyover near DDU Marg to meet a fourth man. The cops swooped in and overpowered the quartet after a gunfight.The police had recovered 3kg of explosives, four non-electric detonators, a timer, six hand grenades, a .30 bore Chinese Star pistol and ammunition and cash. Among the arrested was Shahid Gafoor of Sialkot, Pakistan, who disclosed that he had reached Delhi via Dhaka and Kolkata. Gafoor had also crossed over to India twice earlier, in 1998 and in 2002. He and others had carried out attacks on Rashtriya Rifles camps.Lone is the son of a farmer in Kupwara’s Marhama village, who started an electronics business with a bank loan in 200 but had to close his shop due to rising losses. He then shifted to Allahabad to sell shawls. In 2005, he came in contact with a LIC agent named Altaf Ahmed Kirmani, a Sopore native, who persuaded him to join the Islamic jihad and promised him money to repay his bank loan.Lone had admitted that he was in contact with a commander named Haider alias Doctor, who trained him for the attacks in Delhi.
