Rebels may force triangular contests in half a dozen seats

PATNA: Even though majority of the 40 Lok Sabha constituencies in Bihar will have a direct fight between NDA and Mahagathbandhan, the rebels to enter the fray as independent candidates in their areas of political dominance are likely to throw triangular or multi-corner contests in over half a dozen key seats in the upcoming elections from April 11.BJP rebel Putul Kumari Singh will fight against Giridhari Yadav of JD(U) and Jay Prakash Narayan Yadav of RJD in Banka. The clout of Putul, who is the wife of former Union minister late Digvijay Singh, could be gauged from the fact that a large number of Rajput supporters accompanied her during filing of the nomination papers on March 18. After she refused to withdraw her papers, BJP expelled her for six years.Sridhar Mandal, a retired IPS officer who resigned from BJP, is also trying his luck from Banka, which most of the times has elected a Yadav or Rajput candidate to the Lok Sabha. Yadav and Kushwaha voters are also in sizeable numbers and play a decisive role in the victory of candidates from this seat. In 2014, Jay Prakash (RJD) had defeated Putul (BJP) by a margin of 10,000 votes only.Similar is the case with Madhepura where sitting MP Rajesh Ranjan alias Pappu Yadav has filed his papers as an independent candidate against former Union minister Sharad Yadav, who is contesting on the RJD symbol. In 2014, Pappu had won the seat on the RJD ticket by defeating Sharad by a margin of about 56,000 votes. JD(U) has fielded Dinesh Chandra Yadav. The voters belonging to Yadav caste are a decisive force in Madhepura. There is a famous saying that ‘Rome Pope Ka, Madhepura Gope Ka’ (What Rome is for Pope, Madhepura is for Yadavs). RJD had expelled Pappu for abusing senior party leaders.The case of Jehanabad is more interesting. While RJD has again reposed faith in its ‘dabang’ Belaganj MLA Surendra Yadav, JD (U) has fielded Chandeshwar Prasad Chandrawanshi in this Bhumihar-Yadav dominated constituency. The likely entry of sitting MP Arun Kumar as an independent candidate this time will make the triangular contests interesting. Arun belongs to Bhumihar caste. Interestingly, RJD chief Lalu Prasad’s elder son Tej Pratap Yadav has announced his support to one Chandra Prakash from this seat. His joining the fray will make it a multi-corner contest in Jehanabad. “Battlelines have been drawn between the RJD’s official nominee and Chandra Prakash,” said Maheshwar Manjhi of Makhdumpur in Jehanabad district.In 2014, Arun was elected as an NDA candidate on the RLSP ticket by defeating RJD’s Surendra by over 42,000 votes. Later, he had differences with RLSP chief Upendra Kushwaha, who himself switched over to RJD-led Grand Alliance recently.Sheohar and Maharajganj in north Bihar are also likely to witness triangular fights. Former MP Lovely Anand, who recently joined Congress, has announced to contest as an independent candidate after the seat went to RJD under the seat-sharing formula of Grand Alliance comprising Congress, RJD, RLSP, HAM (S) and Vikassheel Insaan Party (VIP). “Whatever the situation may be, I will contest from Sheohar, which was earlier represented by my husband Anand Mohan twice,” she said.BJP has fielded its sitting MP Rama Devi from there. RJD is yet to announce its candidate due to Tej Pratap’s demand for party ticket to Angesh Singh in this Rajput-Vaishya-Muslim dominated constituency. RJD, sources said, wanted to field Vaishali MP Rama Kishore Singh, also a Rajput, from that seat. Rama (BJP) had defeated Md Anwarul Haque (RJD) by over 36,000 votes in 2014.Maharajganj, represented by Janardan Singh Sigriwal (BJP), is no exception. While BJP has retained its candidate, RJD has fielded Randhir Singh. In 2014, Sigriwal had defeated former MP Prabhunath Singh of RJD by over 38,000 votes. The entry of former MLC Mahachandra Prasad Singh in the fray will make the otherwise two-way contest a triangular fight.As elections in Bihar have mainly been contested on caste lines, the rebels will change the dimension of the fight. It will be interesting to see whether they just play spoilsports for party’s official nominees or win some seats.
