Former brothers-in-arms Siddaramaiah and HD Deve gowda will come together again to make the most of their hold on old Mysuru region

HD Deve Gowda

Siddaramaiah

Bengaluru

No parking, no vote selling in Bengaluru

Bangalore

‘It’s democracy vs. dictatorship’

No using kids to campaign

.. And no holiday without voting

Exactly 25 years after they became a formidable force ensuring right electoral combination of Vokkaliga and Kuruba vote bank, former prime ministerand Congress Legislature Party leaderare making an effort to revive their past.The two leaders will be taking up joint campaigning of Congress and the JD(S) candidates to consolidate the Vokkaliga and Kuruba votes in the old Mysuru region.Way back in 1996, Gowda was the Janata Dal candidate for the Chief Minister’s post. At the time, Siddaramaiah was his right-hand man. They toured the State together and ensured that the united Janata Dal got 115 seats. Though there were former chief ministers late Ramakrishna Hegde and late JH Patel, it was Gowda and Siddaramaiah who stood out and were seen as a power to reckon with.In fact, when Gowda was chosen for the prime minister’s job, he left Siddaramaiah as Deputy chief minister to keep hold on the government as well as the party. In 2006, Siddaramaiah ended his ties with both the JD(S) and Gowda. Ever since, both had turned against each other, until the 2018 fractured Assembly verdict.But 25 year later, the equations have changed drastically. Today, Siddaramaiah is no less a political master than his previous mentor. He commands influence and has a hold not just on his Kuruba vote bank, but across a spectrum of backward classes and minorities where as Gowda’s hold continues to be strong in the Vokkaliga heartland.In old Mysuru region, Vokkaligas and Kurubas don’t see eye-to-eye and are vertically split on cast lines and align with the JD(S) and the Congress respectively. In fact, the 2018 Assembly results where the JD(S) managed to get a majority in Vokkaliga belt is termed as a vote against Siddaramaiah rather than that of the Congress.To stop this split in votes and ensure that alliance candidates win maximum seats in old Mysuru region, the two leaders have decided to campaign in Mysuru, Hassan, Mandya, Tumakuru and infrom April 9. The duo will kick-start their joint tour from Mysuru on April 9, followed by Tumakuru, from where Gowda is contesting (April 10), Hassan (April 11), Mandya (April 12) Bengaluru South and North (April 13).On the directions of the Election Commission, the government on Monday transferred Belagavi district Deputy Commissioner Ujwal Kumar Gosh. Vishal R, a 2004 batch IAS officer, has been posted in his place.After father and son refused to contest, the Congress has named a HB Manjunath as its nominee for the Davanagere Lok Sabha seat. Earlier, the party had chosen former minister and sitting MLA Shyamanuru Shivashankarappa. When he refused, Congress offered the ticket to his son, SS Mallikarjun, also a former minister. He too refused, following which Manjunath was selected.As many as 100 homes in Mahalakshmi Layout have declared that they will not allow parking, and selling of votes. The Bruhat Bengaluru Mahanagara Palike (BBMP), Election Commission andPolitical Action Committee (BPAC) have been pasting placards outside every home that are to stay all year long. The campaign started on March 28 at Mahalakshmi Layout with a team of 50 volunteers, residents, BBMP officials, and continued on Thursday in Jayanagar. The placards read ‘Dear Politicians, Our Vote is Not for Sale. We seek your commitment for better governance, not your money,’ besides also giving the message for ‘No Parking’.Former Chief Minister and Congress Legislature Party leader Siddaramaiah has termed the Lok Sabha elections 2019 as a fight between democracy and dictatorship. At an interaction organised by the Bangalore Reporters’ Guild and the Press Club, the former CM said that there was a need to debate and dissect PM Narendra Modi’s claims in the last five years. “He has been playing an emotional card and forgotten development agenda. If someone believed that surgical strikes alone will help BJP to return to the power, they are stupid. People are wise enough to defeat those making false claims,” he said.Don’t even think of using school kids for poll campaign activities, as the Karnataka State Commission for Protection of Child Rights (KCPCR) has issued a warning notice about this. The KCPCR issued a public notice warning all the political parties and candidates against using children. It has directed all Deputy Commissioners to take the notice seriously. In a communication sent to Chief Electoral Officer, KCPCR’s in charge chairperson Y Mariswswamy said, “As it is vacation time for schools, there are chances of political parties misusing children for poll-related activities including election campaigns.” He said the commission has powers to register a suo-motu case against the candidates if anyone uses kids.Vaman Pai, owner of the Pai restaurant in Gokarna, has taken up an initiative to spreading awareness about the voting among the youth. The owner has put a notice at the entrance of the restaurant stating that people who come to Gokarna on vacation during the Lok Sabha elections by skipping their votes will not get food or any hospitality at the restaurant. It requests the tourists to stay back at their hometown and vote for the betterment of the country. Vaman told BM he did this as over the years he has observed that the youngsters miss their votes and come to Gokarna on vacation.
