TV actress Ruhi Singh booked for allegedly assaulting police officer, rams car into 5 vehicles (Video)

Follow us on TV actress Ruhi Singh booked for allegedly assaulting police officer, rams car into 5 vehicles (Video)

TV actress Ruhi Singh is under scanner for allegedly assaulting and misbehaving with women police officers in Mumbai last night. The actress was reportedly driving under the influence of alcohol in two separate incidents that took place on Monday early morning. The Khar police have arrested Ruhi’s friend, Rahul Singh and Swapnil Singh, the actress is yet to be arrested. As per the police, the incident took place around 2 am in the morning when Ruhi Singh was going back home in an inebriated state with her friends.

When Ruhi Singh and her friends were on Liking Road, one of them wanted to use the restroom in a food outlet. But since it was the wee hour of night, the outlet was closed. The authorities asked them to leave, after which they started banging the doors and started hurling abuses at the staff. The staffer intimated the police control room.

When the police arrived, Ruhi Singh and her friend misbehaved with the police officers. They assaulted the police, for which all three of them were booked. Ruhi is yet to be arrested as female accused cannot be arrested after sunset.

An hour later, Ruhi Singh rammed her vehicle into five other vehicles under the effect of alcohol. Santacruz police reached the spot and took her medical samples to check if she was driving under the influence of alcohol. She was booked in a separate case and then allowed to leave. "We have received reports of her blood and medical tests, which have confirmed that she was inebriated at the time of the incident,” Additional Commissioner of Police Manoj Sharma told DNA.

Khar police have booked Ruhi and her friends under section 323 (voluntarily causing hurt), section 332 (voluntarily causing hurt to deter public servant from his duty), section 504 (intentional insult with intent to provoke breach of peace), section 510 (misconduct in public by a drunken person) and section 34 (common intention) of Indian Penal Code.

In the second case, Ruhi Singh has been booked at Santacruz police station for endangering life and safety due to rash and negligent driving (section 279) and driving under the influence of alcohol (motor vehicles act).
