NASA claims 'terrible' Indian satellite destruction test put ISS astronauts in danger

The risk of debris colliding with the International Space Station has risen by 44%, according to NASA

NASA has berated the Indian space agency ISRO for an anti-satellite missile test that endangered astronauts aboard the International Space Station (ISS).

Prime Minister Narendra Modi announced on March 27 that India had achieved an "historic feat" by shooting down its own low-orbit satellite with a ground-to-space missile, making the country a "space power".

However, NASA Administrator Jim Bridenstine has criticised the testing of such anti-satellite (ASAT) weapons, claiming that the risk of debris colliding with the ISS has risen by 44% over a period of 10 days.

"That is a terrible, terrible thing to create an event that sends debris at an apogee that goes above the International Space Station," Brindestine said in an address to employees.

Image: www.isro.gov.in) www.isro.gov.in)

"That kind of activity is not compatible with the future of human spaceflight."

He said the missile test created 400 pieces of orbital debris, around 60 of which are big enough to track, with a diameter of 10cm or more. 24 of those pieces pose a potential risk to the ISS.

However he added that: "The International Space Station is still safe. If we need to manoeuvre it we will."

India's ministry of external affairs insists that the risk from Mission Shakti is low, saying the test was done in low-earth orbit, at an altitude of 300km (186 miles), to ensure that no space debris would collide with the ISS.

"Whatever debris that is generated will decay and fall back onto the earth within weeks," it said.

Bridenstine admitted that it was true that this would eventually happen. "The good thing is, it's low enough in Earth orbit that over time this will all dissipate," he said.

However, Bridenstine told colleagues he feared India's ASAT test could prompt other countries to carry out similar tests.

"When one country does it, other countries feel like they have to do it as well," he said.

China provoked international alarm with a similar test in 2007.

The US military is in total tracking about 10,000 pieces of space debris , nearly a third of which is said to have been created by the Chinese test.

"It's unacceptable and NASA needs to be very clear about what its impact to us is," said Bridenstine.
