NASA says risk to ISS from A-Sat debris

A case of the pot calling the kettle black. From a nation that created most of the debris in space over decades, th… https://t.co/Bx5LaOYSFY — anand mahindra (@anandmahindra) 1554181886000

WASHINGTON: Calling India’s anti-satellite (A-Sat) test a "terrible, terrible thing," the chief of the US space agency NASA slammed India on Monday for endangering astronauts abroad the International Space Station (ISS) with the resultant space debris. The charge invited swift rebuttals from India, questioning how 400 pieces of orbital debris generated by the Indian test posed a greater hazard than the tens of thousands of fragments produced by US, Chinese, and Russian tests.In arguments that are reminiscent of American reaction to India’s nuclear test and its stand on the issue of global warming, the US being the most toxic and aggravating force on both issues, NASA bore down on India with a vehemence that was not reflected in more measured response from the Trump administration. "That is a terrible, terrible thing to create an event that sends debris at an apogee that goes above the International Space Station. That kind of activity is not compatible with the future of human spaceflight," NASA Administrator Jim Bridenstine said at a townhall meeting of NASA employees, adding, "It's unacceptable and NASA needs to be very clear about what its impact to us is."Bridenstine’s blistering criticism went far beyond the Trump administration’s circumspect reaction, which took into account New Delhi’s assurances on the issue of space debris, soon after the March 27 test."The issue of space debris is an important concern for the US government. We took note of Indian government statements that the test was designed to address space debris issues," a State Department spokesman had said, prefacing his remarks by recounting "our strong strategic partnership with India," and pledging "we will continue to pursue shared interests in space and scientific and technical cooperation, including collaboration on safety and security in space."But Bridenstine, a former Republican Congressman from Oklahoma whose appointment as NASA administrator was criticized on account of his lack of qualifications in science (he is a converted climate change denialist), did not hold back, evoking fearsome spectacle of India space debris striking the International Space Station."Here is what we know about the most recent direct ascent anti-satellite test done by India," he explained gravely. "We know that we have identified 400 pieces of orbital debris from that one event (the Indian A-Sat test). Now, all of it cannot be tracked. What we are tracking right now, objects big enough to track and we are talking about objects 10 cm or bigger … about 60 pieces have been tracked. They have got tracking number… Out of those 60, we know that 24 of them are going above the apogee of ISS."Bridenstine also claimed that NASA’s analysis showed that the threat to ISS from possible collisions had increased by 44 per cent without explaining how he came up with the number."We are learning more and more every hour that goes by about this orbital debris that has been created from this anti-satellite test. Where we were last week, from an assessment that comes from NASA experts … was that the risk to the ISS was increased by 44 per cent. The risk, and I am talking about small debris impact to the ISS, risk went up 44 per cent over a period of ten days," he said.But he also acknowledged that the debris from the Indian test was much smaller compared to that created by a similar test by China in 2007, which generated thousands of pieces of debris, and that no harm was likely to be done to the ISS or the astronauts."While the risk went up 44 per cent, our astronauts are still safe. The ISS is still safe. If we need to maneuvre it, we will. But probability of that, I think, is low. he said, adding "The good thing is that it is low enough and over time this will all dissipate. You go back in time, 2007, (the) direct ascent anti-satellite test by the Chinese, a lot of the debris is still in the orbit."India had explained in the aftermath of the technology demonstrator that the test was conducted in the lower atmosphere to minimize orbital space debris. In fact, many Indian space aficionados congratulated DRDO for minimixing the fallout.Washington’s blow hot-blow cold reaction to India’s A-Sat test generated intense speculation in India’s space and strategic communities, with explanations ranging from lack of coordination in the Trump administration to a US re-think about India’s capabilities.Space buffs sneered about NASA’s concern about 400 pieces of Indian debris posing a greater danger than the tens of thousands of orbital debris created by the US and China. "A case of the pot calling the kettle black. From a nation that created most of the debris in space over decades, this is an audacious statement..." tweeted industrialist Anand Mahindra.Bridenstine, who is the first elected official to serve as NASA Administrator, was nominated by President Trump and confirmed by the Senate by a party line 50-49 vote. Although a space buff who served on the House Committee on Armed Services and Committee on Science, Space and Technology, his lack of background and depth in science and space issues led many to question his appointment. His criticism of NASA’s spending on climate science and his support for increased privatization of US civil and military space activities also attracted adverse commentary.
