Rahul Gandhi is weak on national security

Sunil Sharan is the author of three books: (i) Lockdown: India Under Siege from Corona (RosettaBooks), (ii) Modi 2.0: Beyond the Ordinary (Bloomsbury), and (iii) How I Came to Christ (Wipf and Stock). LESS ... MORE

Rage burns through my heart, railed the PM upon seeing the dead bodies of the Pulwama soldiers. Did he channel his rage? Yes, he did. In an unmitigated triumph for him, his jets loitered around in Pakistani air space telling Pakistan that they could strike anywhere at will.

Had Pakistan brought down even one of those jets, it would have gloated about it endlessly. An unmitigated triumph for the PM would have turned into an unmitigated disaster. In India’s pantheon of former prime ministers, only one PM could have been expected to perform similarly as Modi. And that is Indira Gandhi.

Small wonder then that the PM seldom criticizes Indira. In fact he has modeled his government on Indira’s. And for many inexplicable reasons, the nation pines for Indira. It pines for her through her granddaughter.

Rahul and his mom ruled India when 26/11 happened. Did rage burn through their hearts as well? If so, how did they channel their rage? Barely six months after 26/11, their prime minister was palling around with the Pakistani PM denying any Indian involvement in Balochistan.

Rahul and his mom ruled India from 2004-2014. Right through their rule, AFSPA was imposed in J&K and in much of the Northeast. In 2015 Tripura removed AFSPA and in 2018 Meghalaya followed likewise, all during Modi’s tenure. Now Rahul promises an overall review of AFSPA.

The nation is facing a brutal insurgency in J&K aided and abetted by a ruthless foreign enemy. Since the insurgency is so brutal, the tactics to tackle it have been and have to be ham-handed. But if AFSPA goes from J&K, what will happen to the counter-insurgency there?

Rahul and his mom left J&K in as terrible a shape as it finds itself in today. In 2008, Rahul allied with a man much in the news today for teaching people the history of J&K, Omar Abdullah. After winning state elections, Rahul handpicked Omar to be the state’s CM over his father, Farooq.

Not once during his five-year long tenure did Omar seem to question the validity of his own chief ministership. The year 2010 was particularly bad for his rule. His security forces killed over a hundred people. Then in 2014, the state was hit by epic floods. The same Indian army, so often decried in J&K, came to the state’s rescue with hardly a modicum of gratitude in return.

Now once again Rahul has allied with the same Omar. Omar has become the talk of the nation asking for the restitution of the state’s PM and president. Granted that compromises were made to grant J&K grant special status when Maharajah Hari Singh acceded to India.

Granted that a state PM and a state president were in existence until 1965, when the state legislature changed their nomenclature. Granted too that the state’s high court overturned the state’s act in 2015.

But think for an instance. In countries like Russia and China, there are significant Muslim-majority regions — Chechnya and Xinjiang respectively. Do these countries allow themselves to have two PMs and two presidents.

Also, Article 35A grants J&K to decide only because it’s a Muslim-majority state who a permanent resident of the state can be. Punjab too is a state where a minority – the Sikh – is in the majority. Does Punjab get to decide who its permanent residents can be. Taking the logic further, does any Hindu-majority state get to decide who its permanent residents can be.

Still, as I said, when J&K acceded, compromises were made. And now the status of Article 35A is pending before the Supreme Court. Why not wait for the court’s verdict instead of raking up dead horses.

Expectedly, Modi has torn into Omar and his friend, Rahul. But while Omar has volubly defended his stance, Rahul’s silence is eerie. Rahul was quick to question Balakot and the surgical strikes of 2016, but now he is deafeningly quiet.

Does Rahul want to coddle Pakistan after another 26/11 or Pulwama, or does he want to teach it a lesson if they ever happen again? Does Rahul want two PMs and two presidents in India? Does Rahul want to hamstring the armed forces by revoking AFSPA? Rahul says that his record on national security is well-known. Yes, it is well-known, to be muddy and confusing.

National security may not decide the upcoming elections, as Modi thinks it might, but Rahul is doing himself no favours on national security.

Facebook Twitter Linkedin Email Disclaimer Views expressed above are the author's own.
