Lok Sabha elections 2019: A ‘volatile’ battle in Jammu and Kashmir amid continuing turmoil

National Conference president Farooq Abdullah with his son, party vice-president Omar Abdullah | Photo Credit: PTI

The 2019 Lok Sabha elections in Jammu and Kashmir will be held in the wake of events that do not have a parallel in Indian history. Just weeks before the people of the state cast their votes, India was left shocked by the audacity of Pakistan-based Jaish-e-Mohammed (JeM) terrorists who targetted a convoy of the Central Reserve Police Force in Pulwama district claiming the lives of 40 soldiers.

What followed was even a greater event – India conducted air strikes in Pakistan’s Balakot, destroying the biggest terror camp of JeM. Hundreds of terrorists and their trainers are believed to have been killed in the strikes. The air strikes were unprecedented and brought India and Pakistan close to a war.

Whatever the risks, the Indian Air Force action sent a categorical message to the enemy – that India was ready to cross its borders in any given manner and take pre-emptive action against terrorists. It also sent across a message that India was no longer a ‘weak state’, as considered by many vis-a-vis its dealings with Pakistan.

The Pulwama terror attack and subsequent Balakot air strikes have become key issues in 2019 elections - not just in Jammu and Kashmir but across the country. While the ruling Bharatiya Janata Party (BJP) at the Centre is using the twin issues to drive home the point that it was the best option as far as safeguarding the borders of the country is concerned, the opposition National Conference (NC), the Peoples Democratic Party (PDP) and even the Congress have raised doubts over the air strikes and their effectiveness and slammed the BJP for using national security for electoral gains.

The PDP and some others have also criticised the security forces’ crackdown against terrorists in Jammu and Kashmir (number of encounters and terrorists killed in them has sharply gone up during the BJP rule at the Centre). They have also questioned the action taken by government agencies against separatists like Yasin Malik and Mirwaiz Umar Farooq in terror funding cases in the Valley.

Article 370 and 35A challenge

The other key issues in Jammu and Kashmir this election will be Article 370 and Article 35A. While the talk to repeal Article 370 that provides special status to the state of Jammu and Kashmir under the Indian Constitution has gained momentum over the recent months, Article 35A that provides special privileges to permanent residents of the state and bars outsiders from buying property has been challenged in the Supreme Court.

Valley leaders like NC’s Omar Abdullah and PDP chief Mehbooba Mufti, both former CMs, have warned against the move to scrap the two Articles. In fact, Mufti has said that Jammu and Kashmir’s ties with the rest of India will snap if Article 370 was repealed.

J&K battle for 6 seats

The state of Jammu and Kashmir has six Lok Sabha or parliamentary seats and voting on these six seats will be held in the first five phases – April 11, 18, 23, 29 and May 06. Counting will take place here on May 23, the same day votes will be counted across the country.

In the 2014 Lok Sabha elections, the BJP and PDP had won three seats each – the former in the Jammu and Ladakh regions while the latter in the Kashmir Valley. The Assembly elections later in 2014 had resulted in a split verdict and the BJP and the PDP reached an agreement in March 2015 to form a coalition government.

But, three years later in June 2018, the BJP parted ways with the PDP saying it had become untenable to continue in the government over deteriorating law and order situation in the state.

Alliances in J&K

While the BJP and the PDP are fighting the Lok Sabha elections alone, the Congress and the NC have forged an alliance for three seats in the state. On the remaining three seats, the two parties will have a friendly contest.

While Congress would contest the Jammu and Udhampur seats, the NC will fight from Srinagar. On Baramulla, Anantnag and Ladakh seats, both parties will field candidates.

Jammu and Kashmir Assembly Elections

J&K was expected to go to polls simultaneously with the Lok Sabha elections but the Election Commission decided against it citing security situation. The move was vehemently criticised by local parties, who wanted state elections to be held along with the Lok Sabha polls.

It remains to be seen whether the BJP will be able to hold on to its voter base post what has been described as an upheaval in the Valley over the last few years wherein counter-terrorism measures have seen a sharp jump along with incidents of stone pelting and civilians trying to move into areas during encounters in a bid to protect terrorists. Or whether the PDP and NC register jump in their vote share while trying to protect the so-called interests of the Kashmir Valley.

The Congress, meanwhile, has nothing to lose after being wiped out from the state in the last Lok Sabha elections. Whether it will make an impact this time around, we will know on May 23.

The views expressed by the author are personal and do not in any way represent those of Times Network.
