Pakistan summons Indian deputy HC over ceasefire violations

The ceasefire violations by India are a threat to regional peace and security

Indian forces along the LoC and the working boundary are continuously targeting civilian populated areas with heavy weapons

Pakistan condemned ceasefire violations by the Indian forces along the LoC

ISLAMABAD: Foreign Office Spokesperson Dr Mohmmad Faisal Wednesday summoned the Indian Deputy High Commissioner (HC) Gaurav Ahluwalia and condemned ceasefire violations by the Indian occupation forces along the Line of Control (LoC) on April 1 and 2.



Dr Faisal, who is also the Director General of South Asia and South Asian Association for Regional Cooperation (SAARC) said on April 1, four innocent civilians including Muhammad Yousaf, Muhammad Shahzad, Akbar Jaan and Kousar Parveen were injured in Nezapir, Rakhchikri, Hotspring and Jandrot, Sectors along the LoC.

He said on April 2, one innocent civilian Muhammad Attique, an eighteen years old boy and resident of Jugal Pal, was martyred and three women namely Fareeda Begum, Azmat Begum and Rehmat Bibi residents of Jigot Bahadur sustained injuries in Kotkottera and Khuiratta sectors along the LoC.



On the same day, Indian troops intentionally targeted innocent civilians traveling in a civil bus in Bagsar Sector.

This is not only in clear violation of existing arrangement but also unethical and immoral, he said.

He said the Indian forces along the LoC and the working boundary are continuously targeting civilian populated areas with heavy weapons.

This unprecedented escalation in ceasefire violations by India is continuing from the year 2017 when the Indian forces committed 1970 ceasefire violations, he said.

The spokesperson said the deliberate targeting of civilian populated areas is indeed deplorable and contrary to human dignity, international human rights and humanitarian laws.

The ceasefire violations by India are a threat to regional peace and security and may lead to a strategic miscalculation, he said.

Dr Faisal urged the Indian side to respect the 2003 Ceasefire arrangement, investigate these and other incidents of ceasefire violations, instruct the Indian forces to respect the ceasefire, in letter and spirit and maintain peace on the LoC and the Working Boundary.

He also urged that the Indian side should permit United Nations Military Observer Group in India and Pakistan (UNMOGIP) to play its mandated role as per the UN Security Council resolutions.
