2019 Telangana Lok Sabha elections: BJP, Congress struggle to retain strongholds as TRS juggernaut rolls on

CM K Chandrashekar Rao | Many political pundits feel that it'll be a cakewalk for the TRS in 2019 | Photo Credit: BCCL

New Delhi: Winning 11 of the 17 Lok Sabha parliamentary constituencies in the state in 2014, the K Chandrashekar Rao-led Telangana Rashtra Samiti (TRS) has set an ambitious target of securing 16 seats this time in the upcoming Lok Sabha elections. In 2014, while the Congress won two seats, the BJP secured a single seat. But this time, these two parties will look to not only retain their respective constituencies but increase their tally.

The two national parties have declared candidates on all 17 seats, while the TRS has fielded 16 candidates, leaving Hyderabad for its ally All India Majlis-e-Ittehad-ul-Muslimeen (AIMIM). However, many political pundits feel that it'll be a cakewalk for the TRS and a single-sided election.

For the BJP, the party seems to be dependent on the popularity of Prime Minister Narendra Modi alone. It faces an uphill task to retain the lone parliamentary constituency of Secunderabad under its fold, let alone any other seat in the state. In the 2018 Assembly polls, TRS won six of seven Assembly segments in Secundrabad and has fielded the state's youngest candidate.

In its bid to retain the seat, BJP has fielded G Kishan Reddy, dropping former Union minister and sitting MP Bandaru Dattatreya for his poor performance. But Reddy is an outsider in the constituency and was defeated from the Amberpet Assembly segment in 2018 by a TRS candidate.

Dattatreya was contesting from the seat since 1991, losing out to TRS candidate in 2004 and 2009 but regaining the seat in 2014 with a massive majority. He was even given the portfolio of Union Minister of State for Labour and Employment but then was dropped in 2017.

For Congress, the stakes are higher. The grand old party has decided to go alone after its crushing defeat in the Assembly polls and defection of its MLAs into TRS. The party in alliance with Andhra Pradesh Chief Minister Chandrababu Naidu-led Telugu Desam Party (TDP) in 2018 had managed to secure 19 seats in the 119-member Assembly, three seats less than its 2014 tally, but 9 of its MLAs have declared support to the ruling party.

Though the TDP will again support the Congress in the general elections, there has been no formal announcement of an alliance between the two. CM Naidu has only announced that TDP won't field any candidates in Telangana, a first since the party's inception in 1982.

As for the big names that are in the fray, Congress party president N Uttam Kumar Reddy will be contesting from Nalgonda, while working president A. Revanth Reddy will fight from Malkajgiri. Former Union minister Balram Naik from Mahbubabad will run from Mahbubabad.

Key electoral issues

Although the elections are not being considered much of a challenge for the TRS, they are being seen as a litmus test for KCR's social welfare schemes. With the Congress and BJP trading barbs over the dearth of jobs under PM Modi's rule, KCR's Rythu Bandhu scheme, an investment support initiative for farmers is likely to be at the centre of poll issues.

Low food prices and rising farm costs with the number of farmers committing suicides increasing is another issue that would loom large ahead of the polls.

The state is set to go to polls in the first phase of elections on April 11.

(The views expressed by the author are personal and do not in any way represent those of Times Network.)
