Congress manifesto is 'anti-national', says Modi

Terming the Congress' election manifesto as "anti-national", Prime Minister Narendra Modi on Wednesday warned that it will result in destabilisation and disintegration of the country.

Accusing the Congress of "playing with national security", he said it will kill the morale of the armed forces and help Pakistan.

"The Congress' plans to knock off the provisions of treason against anti-national forces and Maoists, subversive urban Maoists, and other points, would serve to break the country. For this, the people must punish the Congress-Nationalist Congress Party," Modi exhorted.

He demanded whether NCP President Sharad Pawar -- who has been a former Defence Minister of India -- realises the implications of all this and if he supports the Congress conspiracy to weaken the nation and its armed forces in the manifesto.

Modi said for decades, the country was moving in the wrong directions vis-a-vis terrorists and divisive forces, but now it is in the "right direction and moving speedily".

"They (opposition) are conspiring to stop all this. The Congress' philosophy is to either capture (power) or create confusion and destabilize," he said, addressing an election rally here this evening.

Admitting that when they (Congress) could not do much in thier 70 years' rule, "what could I do in five years", Modi said he nevertheless made sincere efforts in different directions and when the works are completed, the results would be visible.

Terming the Gondiya rally this evening as one of the biggest he has ever witnessed, the PM said that it seems each rally addressed by him is breaking the records of attendance of the previous one.

"It appears the people of Maharashtra have made up their minds to uproot the 'Maha-milavat' (mega-hotchpoch, implying the opposition alliance) in these elections," Modi asserted.

He listed the achievements of the NDA government, saying he spent past five years only in filling up the holes of the past 70 years of (Congress) rule, but now the country would be catapulted on the highway to development.

"Your Chowkidar has taken major decisions in an attempt to change the country, ranging from constructing toilets to destroying satellites in space. I want your blessings again for five years to complete my dreams for the country and the pending works," urged Modi.

--IANS

qn/nir

(This story has not been edited by Business Standard staff and is auto-generated from a syndicated feed.)
