Vikram Singh Chauhan joins the cast of Rani Mukerji's 'Mardaani 2'!

Vikram Singh Chauhan (Photo: Web) Rani Mukerji fierce & intense in the FIRST LOOK of 'Mardaani 2'; Shooting commences! He captioned the picture as, "Prioritising learning and strongly believing dots will connect #gratitude" Take a look at the picture below: View this post on Instagram Prioritising learning and strongly believing dots will connect #gratitude A post shared by Vikram Singh Chauhan (@vikramsingh_chauhan) on Mar 30, 2019 at 9:23am PDT However, details related to Vikram's role in the film are still awaited. Speaking about the film, Vikram told India forums that, "Yes, I am part of the movie. I am looking forward to the same, Mardaani 1 was commercially hit. I can't share detail about the same. But all I can say that for me content is main important be it any platform. I am open for any platform but content matters to me." With 'Mardaani 2', Vikram Singh Chauhan is making his Bollywood debut and his fans are super-excited about the same. Shruti Bapna (Photo: Instagram) On the TV front, Vikram Singh Chauhan made his TV debut with 'Qubool Hai' post which he played his first lead role in Channel V's 'Million Dollar Girl'. He was also a part of 'Ek Hasina Thi' but he a household name after playing the role of 'Atharva' in popular Star Plus show 'Jaana Na Dil Se Door'. He was last seen in Sony TV'S popular show 'Ek Deewana Tha' which went off air last year. Stay tuned for more updates!

After the success of her last film 'Hichki', Bollywood actress Rani Mukerji is all set to entertain her fans with the sequel of her 2014 hit film 'Mardaani'. In 'Mardaani 2', the talented actress will be reprising the role of police offier Shivani Shivaji Roy who will reportedly fight it out with a 21-year-old villain. The films' shooting started a few days ago and as reported earlier, 'Yeh Hai Mohabbatein' actress Shruti Bapna aka Ishita's (Divyanka Tripathi) elder sister 'Vandita' will be a part of 'Mardaani 2' . Now, another TV actor has joined the film's cast & he is none other than Vikram Singh Chauhan.Rani's first look from 'Mardaani 2' (Photo: Instagram) Vikram Singh Chauhan shared the great news with his fans on social media. Few days ago, on 30th March, he took to his Instagram account and posted a picture of the clapboard from 'Mardaani 2' sets.
