LS Polls: BJP fields Manoj Kotak from Mumbai North East; 'Nirhua' from Azamgarh

New Delhi [India], Apr 3 (ANI): In what could be termed as a moral victory for the Shiv Sena, the BJP has decided to field Manoj Kotak from Mumbai North East, in place of its sitting MP Kirit Somaiya, in the impending Lok Sabha elections.

Speaking to ANI after the announcement of candidature, Somaiya, while reaffirming support for Kotak, said: "Responsibilities within the party keep shifting, nothing new in it. I am very happy that Manoj Kotak ji has got the ticket. We all will support him and ensure he wins. Ultimately, our aim is a second term for Modi ji."

Last week, Shiv Sena MLA Sunil Raut had said he would contest from Mumbai North East as an Independent candidate if the BJP fields Kirit Somaiya.

"I will contest the Lok Sabha elections from Mumbai North-East constituency even if Kirit Somaiya is given a ticket by the BJP. I will go independent if needed. I am 100 per cent sure that I will contest from this seat no matter what," he had told ANI on March 28.

The BJP, which released its 16th list of candidates on Wednesday for the impending polls, has fielded Bhojpuri actor Dinesh Lal Yadav 'Nirhua' from Azamgarh Lok Sabha seat against Samajwadi Party (SP) chief Akhilesh Yadav. Nirhua had joined the BJP on March 27.

Speaking to ANI after being chosen to contest against Akhilesh, Nirhua said elections cannot be won on the basis of caste.

“There's no question of 'Yadav'. Being a Yadav does not make sure you will get votes here. People here won’t give you their vote only because you are a Yadav. You will fail miserably if you contest on that. The country is now focusing on other issues that the people face instead of the caste,” he added.

There are 80 Lok Sabha seats at stake in Uttar Pradesh.

Among the others who will be contesting the impending polls are Dr Chandra Sen Jadun (Firozabad), Prem Singh Shakya (Mainpuri), Dinesh Pratap Singh (Rae Bareli), and V P Saroj (Machhlishahr (SC)).

It may be noted that as per the seat-sharing pact between the two political parties, the BJP will fight on the Mumbai North East seat. However, Shiv Sena has been opposing Somaiya's candidature from this seat.

Polling in Mumbai North East parliamentary seat in Maharashtra will be held on April 29 in the fourth phase of Lok Sabha elections and the counting of votes will take place on May 23. The last day for filing nominations is April 9.

Meanwhile, voting in Uttar Pradesh will be held during all seven phases of polling, starting April 11. The counting of votes will be held on May 23. (ANI)


