Shiv Sena wins, Kirit Somaiya loses ticket in Mumbai North East

After days of uncertainty over the Mumbai North-East seat, BJP finally relented to Shiv Sena's request and allotted the Lok Sabha ticket to local corporator Manoj Kotak instead of incumbent MP Kirit Somaiya.

It may be mentioned here that in the past five years, Somaiya has criticised the Sena's way of functioning in the political arena and the BMC, where the Sena is in the driver's seat. He had accused the Sena of being corrupt and awarding BMC contracts to contractors close to the party.

Soon after the announcement, Kotak met Somaiya and sought his blessings. Somaiya said that he would work and contribute towards ensuring BJP's victory in the constituency. The Mumbai North-East constituency is characterised by dominant Gujarati voter pockets like Ghatkopar and Mulund. The Marathi voters are prominent in Mulund, Bhandup and Vikhroli. The constituency also represents Dalit, Muslim, and North Indian voters.

In 2016, Somaiya had responded sharply to Thackeray's dare to PM Modi to conduct "surgical strikes" on Swiss banks to bring back black money. He had said Mayawati, Mulayam Singh Yadav "and Uddhav Thackeray" should clarify if they were worried about poor people or those with "boxes of money".

Somaiya had also said he would expose "mafia" in Municipal Corporation of Greater Mumbai and take on their "godfather", hinting at the Sena chief.

When there was acrimony between the Shiv Sena and the BJP after the 2014 general election and the Maharashtra polls, Somaiya retaliated frequently.

Sources said that Sena chief Uddhav Thackeray refused to forgive Somaiya for his personal attacks.

Sensing that he was in trouble, Somaiya had reportedly requested a meeting with Thackeray to make amends but that latter denied. It is likely that the BJP will rehabilitate Lok Sabha MP from Mumbai North-East Somaiya to Rajya Sabha. Minister Vinod Tavde also stated on Wednesday that Somaiya would be rehabilitated and would get his due.

Sena Basher
