Kirit Somaiya dropped from Mumbai North East constituency; Shiv Sena claims victory

BJP

Manoj Kotak

Kirit Somaiya

Mumbai North East constituency

Shiv Sena

minister says differences with party brass to blame and Sena’s oppn played secondary role. Somaiya is being replaced with, a hands-on neta and CM’s close aide.After hemming and hawing for weeks, the BJP on Wednesday finally dropped sitting MPfrom the key. The party has, instead, gone with Mulund corporator Manoj Kotak.The, which was vehemently opposed to Somaiya’s candidature owing to his frequent barbs against the party, claimed victory, saying that it forced BJP’s hand in dropping him. A senior Sena functionary said the final call to drop Somaiya came at Prime Minister Narendra Modi’s rally at Wardha on Monday. “Shiv Sena chief Uddhav Thackeray had said that he was opposed to Somaiya and that his candidature could strain relations with the Sena, which the BJP couldn’t afford. Uddhavji had already conveyed this to the CM and BJP President Amit Shah, and the two then convinced Modi. The BJP leadership did not want to sour relations with the Sena over Somaiya.”A senior BJP minister, however, claimed that Somaiya was dropped over differences with the party’s top leadership—sources in the party said his turned his critical eye towards central ministers as well—and that the Sena’s opposition had played only a secondary role in the decision. The minister said the call to drop him was taken by Shah and Chief Minister Devendra Fadnavis chose Kotak as his replacement.Kotak, a three-time corporator from Mulund, is the BJP’s group leader in the BMC and is known as a hands-on neta who is well connected with leaders cutting across party lines. He is said to have a good grip on administrative issues, has been a long-term BJP loyalist and Fadnavis aide, and had played a key role in reviewing the city’s Development Plan. Though Kotak is a Gujarati face, he is known to have a command over Hindi and Marathi and is popular among Marathi speaking voters too.Kotak had contested the 2014 assembly electrons from Bhandup but lost to the Sena’s Ashok Patil.His candidature took several senior BJP ministers by surprise; they were expecting the party to re-nominate Somaiya.“The CM’s choice shows that he is building his own team and he calls all the shots. The decision to drop Somaiya was taken by the central leadership, but replacing him with Kotak is clearly the CM’s choice. This is to show all old-school BJP leaders who is in charge,” said a party functionary.Somaiya’s ouster, said the functionary, was a warning to anti-Sena voices in the BJP. “This also shows that the CM will not back any anti-Sena voice who jeopardies the alliance. This is an indication that the BJP will prefer to keep the Sena in good humour and BJP leaders can be sidelined or sacked to make that happen.” The functionary said many leaders who belonged to various camps in the BJP have now been kept out, and a new crop of leaders was being promoted with Kotak’s nomination.The Sena is said to be backing Kotak’s candidature since he shares a working relationship with many of the party leaders. The party is expected to help him with his campaign against the NCP’s Sanjay Dina Patil. “It is because of the Sena’s opposition that Kirit has been dropped. This must serve as a warning that we will not take any personal and baseless attacks lying down. We will work wholeheartedly now that Somaiya has been sacked,” a Sena functionary said.Kotak said he was grateful to the party for giving him a chance. “My focus will be infrastructure and transport development for the city. I will focus on improving connectivity and use my experience in the BMC. I will work on having better inter-departmental coordination too for faster connectivity. I am confident of support from every one and will win with a huge margin,” Kotak said.Another senior BJP functionary said Kirit had fallen out with the BJP top brass in the last couple of years. Somaiya has been one of the BJP’s most vocal critics of the Sena and had even accused the Uddhav Thackeray-led party, which rules the BMC, of corruption. In 2016, before the BMC election, he had claimed that he would expose the “mafia” in the city’s civic body and take on their “godfather”. Somaiya had also said that the BMC was in “the grip of a powerful mafia” controlled by “a saheb from Bandra and his PA”. Although the BJP MP did not name the persons he was referring to, his comment was seen as a veiled criticism of Uddhav and his PA Milind Narvekar.Somaiya who is now hoping to get rehabilitated in the party said in a statement on Wednesday: “My heartiest congratulation to Manoj Kotak who is declared candidate from Mumbai North East parliamentary constituency. He is like a younger brother to me. After serving three terms of BMC he is well aware of problems of the city and I am sure he will represent Mumbai in excellent way in parliament. Victory of BJP in North East Mumbai shall be one of the biggest in the state (sic).”
