Urmila Matondkar, Hardik Patel to hold a joint mega rally to address youth

Hardik Patel

Urmila Matondkar

Mumbai

Sanjay Nirupam

The rally will be held in Nirupam’s constituency (Photo by Satyajit Desai)

The Congress seems to be banking on the joint popularity of Patidar quota stir leaderand actorto connect with the youth in the city.With a dearth of young, dynamic leaders from, the party has roped in the two to hold a joint rally in Andheri on Sunday in the constituency of former city Congress chiefWhile Patel is expected to attack the BJP-led ruling disposition and Prime Minister Narendra Modi over unemployment, Matondkar is likely to take on the Centre over rising instances of intolerance and the seeming crackdown on the freedom of expression.“We are already getting a great response from the youth. They want to connect with the party. They are fed up of the BJP’s misrule which has given them only unemployment. Hardik Patel is a popular youth leader and he will tell people about the disastrous Gujarat model. We are sure that the Hardik-Urmila chemistry will strike a chord with young voters,” Nirupam said.The senior Congress leader is fighting from the North West Lok Sabha seat against Shiv Sena’s Gajanan Kirtikar. Nirupam claimed that Hardik’s “sabha” will resonate across the city. “Hardik has a following not just in the Gujarati community but in other communities also. Urmila also has got a lot of positive response. So, this will be our mega youth rally,” Nirupam added.Patel, 25, had started preparations to contest from Jamnagar in Gujarat on a Congress ticket after joining the party on March 12. His plans, however were, foiled after the Supreme Court refused to accord him an urgent hearing on his plea challenging the Gujarat High Court order rejecting a stay on his conviction in the 2015 Vispur rioting case. He will now miss the deadline for filing of nominations.Nirupam said that the ruling has no bearing on his popularity. “He is still the most popular youth leader. I am confident of winning my own seat and doubly sure that the party will perform well in Mumbai.”
