Authorities not letting doctors examine Nawaz Sharif, claims daughter

New Delhi:

Pakistan's jailed former premier Nawaz Sharif's daughter Maryam Nawaz has claimed that authorities are not letting her father’s cardiologists examine him at the Lahore’s Kot Lakhpat jail. "MNS’s cardiologists have been trying to get access to him all day but permission not granted,” the former first daughter tweeted on Friday. The former PM’s daughter said Sharif has pain in the arm, “which is most likely to be angina”. A jail spokesman, however, said jail doctors examined Sharif thoroughly and his health is fine. "Nawaz Sharif is in good health," he said. PML-N president Shahbaz Sharif warned that if anything happened to his elder brother, Prime Minister Imran Khan and the Punjab government will be responsible.



ALSO READ | Imran Khan says war would be suicidal, targets India

"He needs to be examined by the doctors who are privy to his complicated medical history," Maryam said.

MNS’s cardiologists have been trying to get access to him all day but permission not granted. He has pain in the arm which is most likely to be angina. He needs to be examined by the doctors who are privy to his complicated medical history. — Maryam Nawaz Sharif (@MaryamNSharif) January 11, 2019

Sharif, 69, had undergone an open-heart surgery about three years ago in London.

Maryam, who had visited her father in the jail on Thursday, said his father had a "complicate medical history" and he needed special health care.



Earlier, Nawaz Sharif was sentenced seven years imprisonment in the Al-Azizia Steel Mills graft case but was acquitted in the Flagship Investments case. The anti-corruption court said in its ruling that the three-time prime minister was unable to prove the source of income that led to his ownership of a steel mill in Saudi Arabia.



Three cases - Avenfield properties case, Flagship investment case and Al-Azizia steel mills case - were launched against the Sharif family by the National Accountability Bureau (NAB) on September 8, 2017 following a judgment by the Supreme Court that disqualified Sharif in the high-profile Panama Papers case in July last year.



ALSO READ | After 600 tanks, China to provide 4 naval warships to Pakistan



Commenting on the verdict, Sharif said that his conscience was clear as he was never involved in any kind of corruption. "I was never involved in misuse of authority and corruption so my conscience is at peace," he said. His daughter Maryam broke months-long silence and took to twitter to criticize the judgment as "vengeance". "Punishment to the same man for the fourth time. (This was) blind revenge's last hiccup but victory is Nawaz Sharif's, thank God," she tweeted in Urdu.

For all the Latest World News, Download News Nation Android and iOS Mobile Apps.
