Ishq Mein Marjawan April 4, 2019 Written Update: Tara and Netra shake hands to execute their plan

In the previous episode we see how Deep convinces Netra to forgive him and tries to bring her back home. While Deep tried to convince Netra to come with him, she blackmails him to leave seeing Tara there. In the turn of events, just when Deep leaves, Netra warns Tara about the consequences if Deep came to know that they both were partners in crime. Tara assured Netra that Deep would never come to know about them being together. While they were conversing, someone knocks on the door which freaks them. Tara hides behind the curtain and Netra opens the door to Aarohi who tried to convince her to stay away from Deep. Deep comes to Aarohi and they both gets involved in an argument, when Aarohi demands to know why had Deep kept her in captivity for so long.

Deep denied to keep Aarohi trapped, which she does not believe. Here, Tara tells Netra about how Aarohi will never come to know that she had trapped in and kept her in captivity. Netra rejoiced and tells Tara that Deep will also never come to know that it was Tara and her plan to make Deep blind while he will always place his doubts on Aarohi. Tara had made Deep blind so that she can become his support and to make him hate Aarohi for the rest of his life. Netra suggests Tara that they will have to put an end to Deep and Aarohi’s story and make them kill each other. Tara tells Netra about the plan she had on her mind and Netra calls Aarohi near the Kali mandir. Seeing Netra want to meet her, Aarohi feels it to be a plot of Deep to trap her. Here, Tara instigates Vasundhara against Aarohi and tells her about Netra leaving Deep for Aarohi.

Vasundhara tells Tara to take her to the Kali temple where she wanted to kill Aarohi before she could meet Netra. Deep on the other hand, tells someone to keep an eye on Aarohi. Vasundhara and Tara reach the lane where they were waiting for her to come. While Vasundhara sat in the car with fully loaded gun, ready to shoot Aarohi, Tara was hiding. Deep gets a call and rushed to the site. Just when Vasundhara was about to shoot Aarohi, someone hit Vasundhara with a bat which made her fall unconscious. Deep finds an unconscious Vasundhara and calls Aarohi to confront about her condition.

(ALSO READ: Ishq Mein Marjawan April 3, 2019 Written Update: Netra is raged at Deep)
