Stray bull breaks out of shelter home, kills 13-year-old boy in Uttar Pradesh

The stray bull fled the spot after killing the boy (Representative Image) | Photo Credit: BCCL

Bareilly: Even as the administration and police in Uttar Pradesh are busy reeling in stray cattle across the state, a series of unfortunate events have come to light from different parts of the state involving bovine-related deaths. UP Chief Minister Yogi Adityanath had earlier this month set a January 11 deadline to move all stray cattle roaming the streets of Uttar Pradesh to cow shelters.

In Bareilly, a stray bull escaped from a temporary shelter home in Badaun district and attacked a 13-year-old boy on Thursday. The incident which took place in the small town of Bilsi led to the death of the class V student who has been identified as one Dharamveer. In light of the boy's unforeseen demise, his kin has demanded that the cow shelter is shifted out of their town.

Chief Minister Yogi Adityanath has ordered that all stray cattle across the state should be shifted to cow shelters by January 10; Visuals of Lucknow Municipal Corporation workers rescuing stray cows pic.twitter.com/32ULMwl5mS — ANI UP (@ANINewsUP) January 5, 2019

The sub-divisional magistrate, Bilsi, Lal Bahadur Singh told Times of India that locals and police personnel had shifted the city's cattle to a temporary shelter home on Thursday. On the same day, one bull managed to break the door of the shelter and killed the child before fleeing the spot.

Less than 300 kms away, a 60-year-old farmer was allegedly shot at by a retired sub-inspector after the former refused to guard the accused's field against stray cattle. The incident took place in Churbura village under Kotwali police area in Mahoba district on Wednesday night. Latest reports suggest that the farmer was rushed to a hospital and is currently out of danger while a police investigation has been launched to probe the allegations against the retired cop.

Times Network - India's Leading Broadcasting Network, uniquely offering English Entertainment, best in class News channels & Bollywood Masala, available at a Value pack (7 channels) of Rs 13/- per month.

Please contact your cable/DTH service provider now and ensure that your TV viewing experience is complete. To know more click here.

Must Read: Leopard spotting around Pune triggers fear among locals, National Defense Academy issues advisory
