NDA to give UPA tough fight in Tamil Nadu; Congress to fight hard to claw back in the Andamans and Puducherry

The counting of votes will be done on May 23. | Photo Credit: BCCL

Tamil Nadu is a colourful state. The state boasts of uniqueness and diversity of culture and heritage. From having one of the oldest languages in the world to staging some of the most trendsetting political battles in the democratic union of India, vibrant Tamil Nadu has always had a stellar role to play in the political upheavals witnessed by India.

With a staggering 85 political parties in operation – national, Dravidian, communist, religious, caste-based, Dalit, socialist, agrarian – the state has enough ammo to pull strings as a political force at the Centre. Pitching in line with its religious fervour, the Tamil land has worshipped its leaders no less than its deities.

The influence of filmdom in Tamil Nadu politics has been immense, be it the iconic MG Ramachandran or his political protegee J Jayalalithaa of the past, or Kamal Haasan and Rajinikanth today, the past three decades in Tamil Nadu's political annals are replete with politics mixing with silver screen patronage.

After Dravida Munnetra Kazhagam patron M Karunanidhi passed away in August last year, his son MK Stalin took over the mantle and has been rallying hard, far and wide, to keep the legacy of his father going. He teamed up with the Congress and several minority parties in the state in the run-up to the general elections to take on the National Democratic Alliance of the Bharatiya Janata Party and the All India Dravida Munnetra Kazhagam, and others. The BJP has been fomenting dreams to break into the Tamil dominant framework for quite some time now and the saffron party sees this as their best chance to bridge their reach into the southern state.

From what the general mood indicates, it will be a tough fight for supremacy in Tamil Nadu. While the BJP-led NDA is a force to reckon with, sympathy votes and ‘nationalist’ ideologies are strong within the UPA allies.

Tamil Nadu has 39 Lok Sabha constituencies and will go to polls on April 18 in a single phase.

Meanwhile, Puducherry, a relatively newer region, has had a fair bit of influence from political parties in Tamil Nadu but the larger share of an electoral mandate has been in the kitty of national parties. Being a Union Territory, the competition there has been restricted mostly between the Indian National Congress and Dravidian parties, with a single exception of a socialist party representing the region once in its entire history. The All India NR Congress won the general elections in 2014 and R Radhakrishnan became the first Member of Parliament from Lok Sabha representing a regional party in the UT.

Puducherry has only one Lok Sabha constituency and the Congress has won 9 out of 13 general elections in the state, which clearly indicates which side the axis swings in the Union Territory. There isn’t a clear contest as such there as the Congress is once again expected to win the Lok Sabha seat with a clear majority.

Puducherry goes to polls on April 18.

The Parliamentary constituency of the Andaman and Nicobar Islands, however, shows a different picture. Though the Congress party has sent their representative for a consecutive eight times, the Modi wave clearly reflects in the pulse of India’s farthest Lok Sabha constituency. The 2014 elections were won by the BJP with a whopping margin and Bishnu Pada Ray will look to consolidate his position and raise the Lotus flag in the Indian island region once again.

The Andaman and Nicobar Islands go to polls on April 11.

The general elections will be held in seven phases from April 11 to May 19 for 543 Lok Sabha seats across the country. The counting of votes will be done on May 23.

The views expressed by the author are personal and do not in any way represent those of Times Network.
