International success for Radcliffe author's debut short story based on her cancer struggle

FIRST-time author Karen McGinty has achieved a number one international bestseller.

“I’m so pleased and excited, I never expected it in my wildest dreams,” said Karen, 48, a former pupil of Radcliffe’s Coney Green High School.

Her story, Playing With the Darkness, is just one of ten included in the book Wild and Wise Women Around the World - Ten Inspiring Women Share Their Feminine Fires.

“I’ve written things before but never sent them off. However, when I saw the appeal on Facebook it just felt right to apply.”

Karen’s story concentrates on the time in 2001 when she had cancer and how she came to be fully healed and was helped greatly by having a deep connection to the countryside.

In order to explain the benefits of being in nature, she goes back into her early childhood memories and talks about the magical spaces she played in and how it even helped her as a child.

Most of these places were around Elton ‘Raz’ and all the greenbelt areas in the area which are now under threat from housing developments.

“I feel desperately sad about the proposed loss of these beautiful spaces,” said the mother-of-four, who grew up living above her parents’ off licence in Ainsworth Road.

“There are plans to build housing around Elton reservoir, which I think will be a great shame.”

Karen added: “ My work as a therapist involves helping people heal from illness and grief and during my time as a nurse I found so much research proving how nature is beneficial to physical and mental health and well-being.

“I have seen how other people heal quicker in nature and I truly believe we need to keep large areas of green land available for the benefit of our community’s health and well-being.”

The book has raced up the Amazon charts. It is number one in Canada, number six in the UK and number three in America.

All profits will go to supporting women in India through healthcare, education and trade programmes.

“There’s talk of Oprah Winfrey being interested in doing something on the book, which makes me really happy,” said Karen, who now lives in Derbyshire.

She is already working on a new book, which is all about grief. As a voluntary bereavement counsellor for Cruse, it’s something she knows a lot about.

Wild and Wise Women Around the World is published by Influence
