Political swing song: From Robert Vadra in jail to airstrike fail, how politicians took U-turns

A particular speciality of politicians is the U-turns or flip-flops they make just before elections. With the seven-phase Lok Sabha elections just days away, netas across the political spectrum, in their bid to woo voters and slam opponents, are changing their own stand on various issues.

One recent U-turn was by the Bharatiya Janata Party (BJP) leaders on businessman Robert Vadra, the brother-in-law of Congress President Rahul Gandhi. Robert Vadra is accused of money laundering.

Robert Vadra will be jailed: Several BJP leaders

In September, last year, BJP national spokesperson and now a party candidate in Puri Lok Sabha seat in Odisha, Sambit Patra had said that Robert Vadra will be sent to jail for the corruption cases against him. Speaking at a press conference, Sambit Patra had said, "Vadra will certainly go to jail for allegedly helping a defence dealer in bagging contracts during the UPA's rule." He added that the Modi government will act as per the law and not with the mindset of revenge.

Just before the 2014 Lok Sabha polls, Union minister Uma Bharti had also vowed that Robert Vadra will definitely go to jail if the people vote BJP to the power. Sambit Patra and Uma Bharti were not alone.

Union law minister Ravi Shankar Prasad had then released a "Damad [son-in-law] Shree booklet" to intensify the party's attack on the Congress.

The allegations against Robert Vadra were then mentioned frequently because corruption was one issue that the BJP was fighting the elections on.

The U-turn: Never said Robert Vadra will go to jail, says Amit Shah

Contrary to the other BJP leaders' claims, Amit Shah recently said that the party never said that Robert Vadra should be jailed. Despite accusing him of corruption, Amit Shah, in a TV debate, said, "We never said that Robert Vadra should be jailed. We said that the corrupt should be jailed. We also said that Robert Vadra has indulged in rampant corruption. These two should be seen separately."

Balakot action was specifically targeted at the JeM camp: Foreign secretary Vijay Gokhale

After the Balakot airstrikes on February 26, conducted 12 days after a terror attack in Jammu and Kashmir's Pulwama, foreign secretary Vijay Gokhale said that the airstrikes were specifically targetted at the Jaish-e-Mohammed (JeM) camp across the Line of Control (LoC) in Pakistan. Gokhale also said that the airstrikes were necessary because it had intelligence reports that nearly 300 terrorists were being trained to carry out Pulwama-like terror strikes in India.

The U-turn: Balakot was a message, did not intend to kill, says Union Minister SS Ahluwalia

Days after the Balakot airstrikes in Pakistan, that killed scores of Jaish terrorists across the border, Union minister SS Ahluwalia said that the action was to send a message that India was capable of hitting deep inside enemy lines. He also said that the airstrikes did not intend to inflict "any human casualty".

TWEET:

Minister of State in Modi's cabinet, SS Ahluwalia is saying @narendramodi or @AmitShah never claimed that our #AirStrikes killed 300+ Terrorists & we didnt want any "Human Casualties". Is the Govt now backtracking from its claims that they took out a Terrorist Camp in Pakistan? pic.twitter.com/nstgsWF6sZ CPI (M) (@cpimspeak) March 2, 2019

Modiji's army pumps bullets and shells in terrorists: Yogi Adityanath

On Sunday, Uttar Pradesh Chief Minister Yogi Adityanath had said that "Congress ke log aatankwadiyon ko biryani khilate the aur Modiji ki sena aatankwadiyon ko goli aur gola deti hai (The Congress party used to feed biryani to the terrorists and Modiji's army gives bullets and bombs to the terrorists)."

Union minister Mukhtar Abbas Naqvi was also caught on camera referring to the Army as 'Modiji ki sena'.

The U-turn: Indian Army cannot be called 'Modiji's army', says Gen VK Singh

When contacted for comments over the controversy triggered by Adityanath's remark, General VK Singh, also a retired Army chief, said the Indian Army does not belong to any individual but to the nation.

"'Sena kisi ki nahi hoti hai. Sena sirf desh ki hoti hai. Ismey Modi sena kahan se aa gayi' (Army does not belong to an individual. Army only belongs to the nation. Where did Modi army come from?" he said.
