Pre-Monsoon rains, dust storm and thunderstorm to sweep India

Weather News and Analysis

Skymet Weather Team

April and May are core pre-Monsoon months for India wherein pre Monsoon activity picks up gradually, and affects all parts of country barring Gujarat, Konkan and Goa, extreme West Madhya Pradesh.

Whenever, activity occurs, it is seen in pockets and there are different weather systems which cause varied weather activities over many parts of the country. These Pre Monsoon weather conditions take turn and a situation does not occur when Pan India weather activity is observed.

However, this time, almost the entire country is expected to see Pre Monsoon rains including North, Central, East and South India with varying scale.

A Western Disturbance is over Northern Hills which has induced a Cyclonic Circulation over the Northern Plains. Thus, during the next two days, Rajasthan, Punjab, Haryana, Delhi NCR, West Uttar Pradesh and North Madhya Pradesh will see some dust storm, thunderstorm activities along with lightning strikes as well as rain in some pockets.

East India along with Northeast India will also see some weather activity which includes the states of Bihar, Jharkhand, West Bengal, and Northeast India in view of a Cyclonic Circulation over Bihar and one over Assam. Kal Baisakhi will be prevalent over these areas with lightning strikes, thunderstorm, and raging winds. Northeast India will see a prolonged spell of rains.

In South India, usually, wind discontinuity or trough gives rain. Presently, a Trough is extending from Maharashtra up to Karnataka and a discontinuity is over Interior Tamil Nadu and adjoining Kerala. South, Telangana, Interior Karnataka, Interior Tamil Nadu, Rayalaseema, Kerala will see rains today, tomorrow.

Vidarbha is expected to see some rainfall activity as well with isolated pockets of Marathwada. Because of heat, systems come up which are heat generated, which is the case in many parts.

Image Credit:en.wikipedia.org

Any information taken from here should be credited to skymetweather.com
