Will walk out of NDA if BJP doesn't want us, ready to contest from 80 seats in UP: SBSP president OP Rajbhar

Suheldev Bahujan Samaj Party president OP Rajbhar. | Photo Credit: ANI

New Delhi: Suheldev Bahujan Samaj Party president OP Rajbhar has said that he is with the BJP and will remain with the saffron party if they want to keep them. He further said that he has given 100 days to the BJP and if they don’t get any response then his party will fight on 80 seats after 100 days.

Rajbhar, who is a minister in Yogi Adityanath-led BJP government’ had earlier threatened to resign from his post. He has regularly attacked the BJP government for its 'unfairness to the poor people and thirst for power'.

Earlier, while speaking at an event, he had said that he is not a slave of the Bharatiya Janata Party and added that he will always be there to fight on behalf of the poor and the marginalized.

Meanwhile, the Samajwadi Party and Bahujan Samaj Party made an official announcement regarding their seat-sharing agreement ahead of the Lok Sabha elections. Both the parties will contest on 38 seats each while the other two seats will be left for other parties. Both the parties have also decided not to field any candidates from the Gandhi family stronghold – Amethi and Raebareli.

In December, the BJP announced the final seat-sharing agreement with Nitish Kumar’s JD(U) and Ram Vilas Paswan-led LJP for 2019 Lok Sabha elections. As per the agreement, the BJP and Janata Dal (United) will contest from 17 seats each while Lok Janshakti Party will contest elections from 6 seats.

BJP president Amit Shah made the announcement just days after Upendra Kushwaha of the Rashtriya Lok Samta Party (RLSP) decided to quit the NDA alliance to join the Congress-led 'Mahagathbandhan' in Bihar.

Times Network - India's Leading Broadcasting Network, uniquely offering English Entertainment, best in class News channels & Bollywood Masala, available at a Value pack (7 channels) of Rs 13/- per month.

Please contact your cable/DTH service provider now and ensure that your TV viewing experience is complete. To know more click here.
