LDF, NDA chart plans to take on Rahul

Roadshows will be organised in all Assembly constituencies

The Left Democratic Front (LDF) and Bharath Dharma Jana Sena (BDJS) are planning effective strategies to resist the political challenge raised by the United Democratic Front (UDF) by fielding Congress president Rahul Gandhi in the Wayanad constituency for the April 23 Lok Sabha elections.

Though the LDF had an early bird advantage in the constituency by launching the campaign around three week ago, the front is forced to refurbish its strategies in the wake of the roadshow organised by Congress president Rahul Gandhi along with his sister and All India Congress Committee general secretary Priyanka Gandhi Vadra here on Thursday.

The roadshow literally supported the view of the Kerala Pradesh Congress Committee (KPCC) that the candidature of Mr. Gandhi would create a proactive wave in favour of the party in the entire State.

However, C.K. Saseendran, MLA, who is also the chairman of the LDF Wayanad constituency, said the candidature of Mr. Gandhi had given a wrong message to the country and such a move would only help destroy the party.

He said the LDF would intensify its move against the new challenges by raising the issues of farmers, tribespeople and minorities during the campaign in the coming days. Rallies, roadshows and door-to-door campaign would be organised.

Chief Minister Pinarayi Vijayan and Communist Party of India (Marxist) Polit Bureau member Prakash Karat will address the public in separate rallies at Kalpetta and Eranad respectively on April 11. CPI(M) general secretary Sitaram Yechury would address a rally each at Vandoor and Wayanad on April 18.

The BDJS is planning to organise roadshows and parliamentary conventions in the constituency by ensuring the presence of national leaders of the Bharatiya Janata Party-led National Democratic Alliance. Prime Minister Narendra Modi and BJP president Amit Shah will participate in the roadshows, N.K. Shaji, NDA Wayanad constituency convener, said.
