If Art 370 Goes, India Will Turn Occupier: Mehbooba

(MENAFN- Kashmir Observer) PATTAN — Peoples Democratic Party (PDP) president and former Chief Minister Mehbooba Mufti on Thursday said if the Central government scraps Article 370 of the Indian Constitution, then India will become just an occupational force in Jammu and Kashmir.

Speaking at a rally here Mufti said, "If Article 370 is scrapped then India's relation with Jammu and Kashmir will be same as Israel's occupation of Palestine."

Article 370 of the Indian Constitution grants special autonomous status to Jammu and Kashmir.

Hitting out at Bhartiya Janta Party (BJP) national president Amit Shah, the former chief minister said, "Removal of Armed Forces Special Powers Act (AFSPA), protection of Article 370, dialogue with Pakistan, dialogue with Hurriyat leaders and return of the state's power projects were part of the agenda of the alliance."

She asked Amit Shah 'did he forget that the BJP leaders touched feet of Mufti Mohammad Sayeed and pleaded to form the government with him and accepted all the conditions.'

'Dialogue with Hurriyat, revocation of AFSPA, safeguard of Article 370, talks with Pakistan and separatists and return of power projects. You accepted and signed all these conditions,' she said.

Amit Shah had said that abrogating Article 35-A was the party's commitment to the people of the country.

'It has not happened till now as we do not have a majority in Rajya Sabha, but I believe it will happen by 2020. Removing Article 35A has been in our manifesto since 1950, it is our commitment to the people of the country,' Shah had said at the News18 Agenda India Summit.

PDP chief asked Amit Shah the day India revokes Article 370 from Jammu and Kashmir 'you will become an occupational force in Jammu and Kashmir. 'You will lose all your rights in Jammu and Kashmir.'

Reflecting on BJP withdrawing support from PDP in June last year that led to falling of government in Jammu and Kashmir later, Mufti said, "Earlier BJP says yes to PDP's agenda but when it comes to delivering the promise they pulled out of the government."

Earlier on March 30, Mufti warned that if the central government scraps Article 370, its relationship with the state will come to an end.
