Raj Thackeray to lay out plan for Modi Mukt Bharat at MNS' Gudi Padwa rally

Raj Thackeray

Urmila Matondkar

MNS chief

Sharad Pawar

Maharashtra Navnirman Sena (MNS) chiefwho had given a call for a Modi Mukt Bharat (Modi free India) last month, will hold his first mega rally against Prime Minister Narendra Modi-led Bharatiya Janata Party government on Saturday evening.Raj will address his party’s annual Gudi Padwa rally at Shivaji Park where he is expected to slam the BJP government and ask people to vote Modi out.Raj is likely to lay out his plan of action to take on the BJP ahead of the Lok Sabha elections. An MNS functionary said that Raj will give a prevention on the failures of the BJP government and cite examples of his failures like the Digital India, Swacch Bharat, Demonetisation and GST.Raj, who had also asked his party workers to support the opposition candidates against Modi,will hold public meetings or sabhas in select seats across the state, starting next week.For now Raj is likely to hold sabhas in South Mumbai for Congress candidate Milind Deora,in North Mumbai and Sanjay Patil in North East Mumbai. However no sabha will be held in North West Mumbai from where former city Congress chief Sanjay Nirupam is fighting.Outside the city, theis likely to hold sabhas in Maval for Nationalist Congress Party leader Ajit Pawar’s son Parth Pawar. Apart from this he will also support other leaders like state Congress chief Ashok Chavan in Nanded, former Union Home Minister Sushil Kumar Shinde in Solapur, NCP leader and NCP chief’s daughter Supriya Sule and in Nashik, from where the NCP’s Sameer Bhujbal is contesting.Raj will also hold a meeting in Raigad form where state NCP chief Sunil Tatkare is contesting.A senior NCP functionary said that Raj had already spoken to some of these leaders and they had requested him to hold sabhas in their constituencies. However these sabhas will not be joint meetings and will not have the Congress-NCP flags.Last month, calling the CRPF jawans killed in the Pulwama terror attack a political victims, Raj had said that the truth will come out if National Security Advisor Ajit Doval was questioned. "If NSA Ajit Doval is investigated, then all the truth about the Pulwama terror attack will come out. At the time of the Pulwama attack, PM Modi was busy shooting for a film at Corbett National Park. Even after the news of the terror attack was flashed, his shooting continued,” Raj had said.MNS sources said that Raj who can get away by making such allegations will use his oratory to hit out at the BJP in ways that the Congress-NCP can’t.“The MNS is a political party in its own right and we will hold these public meetings to tell people to vote against the BJP. It’s obvious that the Congresss-NCP will benefit from this,” an MNS functionary said.The functionary said that the NCP supremo Sharad Pawar was aware of the move and it had his nod too. The functionary pointed out that this was going to be an experiment to see if MNS’s votes can be transferred to the Congress-NCP.
