Nation's soul being crushed by well-planned conspiracy: Sonia Gandhi's blistering attack on Modi government

Nation's soul being crushed: Sonia Gandhi attacks Centre | Photo Credit: PTI

New Delhi: Launching a blistering attack on the Prime Minister Narendra Modi-led government, United Progressive Alliance (UPA) chairperson Sonia Gandhi on Saturday said that the soul of the country is being crushed by well-planned conspiracy, which is a matter of concern.

Speaking at an event in Delhi, she said that people are being taught a new definition of patriotism while those not accepting diversity are being called patriots.

Sonia accused the ruling dispensation of destroying the institutions during the past five years of its government and added that the BJP government is dismissive towards its political and ideological opponents. “Today we are being taught a new definition of patriotism. Those who do not accept diversity are being called patriots. They are expecting us to tolerate their interference in the matter of food, clothing, and expression,” she said.

Sonia Gandhi in Delhi: Today we are being taught a new definition of patriotism. Those who do not accept diversity are being called patriots. Humse umeed ki ja rahi hai ki khaan paan pehnaave aur abhivyakti ki azaadi ke maamle mein kuch logon ki manmaani hum bardaasht karein. pic.twitter.com/yAXAvV019h — ANI (@ANI) April 6, 2019

Alleging that the BJP government failed to fulfil its duty of enforcing rule of law in the country, Sonia said that the Congress party will develop a system to monitor their implementations if voted to power in the Lok Sabha polls.

Stepping up his attack on the Centre, she said that regressive forces have systematically dismantled the institutions of the country.

Sonia further said that the BJP government does not respect the diversity in India and turns its face if people are attacked for staying true to their faith.

Urging the people to vote for the Congress, she said that when the UPA was in power, under the leadership of Manmohan Singh, the government and civil society used to work together. She also asked the people to vote for a party that is responsible and care about their dignity.

The Lok Sabha elections will be held in seven phases from April 11 to May 19. The counting will be conducted on May 23.
