BJP cannot be cowed down by threats: Laxman

Hyderabad: State BJP president K Laxman on Saturday said Chief Minister K Chandrashekar Rao cannot silence him or BJP to through threats as is the case with the Congress leaders.

Addressing the media here, he said the BJP would continue to question the TRS and its policies which are detrimental to the interests of the people and the State.

As a political party "we are questioning the policies and the misrule of the TRS" by raising the issues concerning the people.

But, TRS chief resorted to threatening him personally and the party, Laxman claimed. He, however, made it clear that neither he nor the party could be forced into submission by KCR. Laxman said those who are associated with the land mafia, liquor syndicates or other such activities would get scared. "there is nothing for him or for the BJP to fear about the threats by KCR", he pointed out.

Claiming that KCR was resorting to personal attacks as the TRS facing a tough situation in several Lok Sabha constituencies across the State.

The situation could have forced KCR to meet the former Minister and TDP leader Mandava Venkate swara Rao, sensing imminent trouble for his daughter and sitting Nizamabad MP K Kavitha in the elections, he said.

The BJP State president said the party could continue to expose its anti-people policies, corruption and dynastic rule in the State. Referring to TRS working president KT Rama Rao asking the State BJP chief to take 'Sanyas' after the elections, he said BJP had started its journey with two seats and worked hard irrespective of loss and gains before reaching to the stage of forming the government at the Centre on its own.

Unlike TRS, BJP would continue to work for people irrespective of electoral wins and defeats. The TRS working president would be active only if the party was in power. Otherwise, he would go to America, he said.

He also criticised the Nizamabad MP K Kavitha for calling BJP a 'Jhuta Party' and alleged that TRS had backstabbed those who had sacrificed their lives for the cause of separate Telangana State by encouraging those who created hurdles in the way of formation of a separate Telangana State.

KCR's pro-farmer claim has been exposed with the turmeric and red jower farmers filing 115 nominations in Nizamabad Lok Sabha constituency.
