"Don’t disappear after elections; work for the people and you will do well in the long run," Raj Thackeray tells Urmila Matondkar

Urmila Matondkar

Raj Thackeray

Congress’ Milind Deora

MNS chief tells actress to continue in politics whether she wins or loses.Actress, Congress’ North Mumbai candidate, received sage advice and promises of support when she met her old friendat his home last week.“Don’t disappear after the elections; work for the people and you will do well in the long run. You will have a bright future in politics and in the Congress party,” the Maharashtra Navnirman Sena (MNS) chief told her, according to a senior party functionary.“Many celebrities come and go in politics, don’t become one of them. Work even once the elections are over, whether you win or lose.”Raj also assured Urmila that his party workers would canvas for her in Mumbai North. The political newbie is up against the BJP’s Gopal Shetty, who represents the constituency in the Lok Sabha. The constituency has a significant population of Marathi voters. The Congress hopes to attract them with the help of the MNS.“Rajsaheb has already directed all MNS workers to help the Congress-NCP,” the MNS functionary said. “The MNS will not openly back the combine, but will support the candidates indirectly,” the functionary said.Raj is already slated to address a series of rallies and meetings against the BJP-led government. Apart from a rally in Mumbai North, Raj is likely to hold sabhas in South Mumbai and North East Mumbai for theand Sanjay Patil, respectively. However, no sabha will be held in North West Mumbai, from where former city Congress chief Sanjay Nirupam is fighting.Outside Mumbai, Raj is likely to hold sabhas in Maval, where NCP leader Ajit Pawar’s son, Parth, is standing, Nanded (state Congress chief Ashok Chavan), Solapur (former Union home minister Sushil Kumar Shinde), Baramati (NCP chief Sharad Pawar’s daughter Supriya Sule) and Nashik (NCP leader Sameer Bhujbal). Raj will also hold a meeting in Raigad, from where state NCP chief Sunil Tatkare is contesting.Meanwhile, Mumbai Congress functionary Bhushan Patil, who is coordinating Urmila’s campaign, said the actress is getting a good response from the people. “The campaign has taken off well and the atmosphere is already all charge up,” he said. “We are meeting people from various communities and interacting with voters. People are just waiting to see her. Urmilaji is a strong candidate and we are confident of winning.“People from all walks of life are reaching out to her. We are focusing on people-to-people contact to connect and not on big rallies.”
