Varun Dhawan's angry fan threatens to kill girlfriend Natasha Dalal; Mumbai cop asked to intervene

New Delhi:

Varun Dhawan's popularity and female fan following skyrocketed in the last few years and especially after the trailer of Kalank portraying him as the intense and fearless Zafar was released. But just like every other achievement comes with a downside, in a shocking turn of events, a female fan of the actor reached his residence and threatened to kill his girlfriend Natasha Dalal.

According to Mid Day, a female fan was seen doing the rounds of the Dhawan mansion for some time, waiting for hours to meet Varun, while he was away from the promotions of Kalank.

Hell broke loose when the security informed the fan that Varun won't be able to meet her today. The stalker lost her calm and created a ruckus outside the residence. She got aggressive and kept saying only one thing, "I will kill Natasha" leaving the security with no option but to call the cops.

Reveals a source from the security team in interaction with Mid Day, "There was a female fan, who was doing the rounds of his house for a long time. We are used to such things and on most occasions, the fans are sweet and never cross their limits. Varun sir usually obliges their selfie requests, if he is available. But, he is currently pressed for time and is juggling too many things. She was waiting for a couple of hours. Sir came late and she was insisting that she meet him then and there. He was pretty tired from the day's work and wanted to rest. She refused to leave and got into a squabble. Initially, she said she will hurt herself. When the security still didn't get her through to Varun sir, she threw a fit. She kept mumbling how she will harm Natasha ma'am."

According to reports by the newspaper daily complaint was lodged at Santa Cruz police station last night. However, an FIR will be lodged only after Varun record's his statement. "It was alarming for us because usually, fans don't get so aggressive. We informed Varun sir, who panicked. She kept saying, 'I will kill Natasha.' After the woman refused to leave even after 45 minutes, we had to call the local police station", confirmed the source.

Varun will soon start the shoot for the remake of Coolie No 1, directed by his father David Dhawan and also starring Sara Ali Khan.

For all the Latest Entertainment News, Bollywood News, Download News Nation Android and iOS Mobile Apps.
