Pakistan claims India planning another attack in April; Foreign Minister Shah Mahmood Qureshi says Islamabad has intel on offensive-India News , Firstpost

He did not elaborate on what evidence Pakistan had or how he could be so specific with the timing, but he said Prime Minister Imran Khan had agreed to share the information with the country.

Karachi: Pakistan has "reliable intelligence" that India will attack again this month, Foreign Minister Shah Mahmood Qureshi said on Sunday, as tension over a February standoff between the two nuclear-armed neighbours had appeared to ease.

The attack could take place between 16 and 20 April, he said, adding that Pakistan had told the five permanent members of the UN Security Council of its concerns.

A suicide car bombing by Pakistan-based militants in Kashmir killed at least 40 Indian paramilitary personnel on 14 February and the risk of conflict rose dramatically on 27 February, when India launched an air strike on what it said was a militant training base.

The following day, Pakistan shot down an Indian fighter jet and captured its pilot who was later released.

"We have reliable intelligence that India is planning a new attack on Pakistan. As per our information, this could take place between 16 and 20 April," Qureshi told reporters in his hometown of Multan.

He did not elaborate on what evidence Pakistan had or how he could be so specific with the timing, but he said Prime Minister Imran Khan had agreed to share the information with the country.

India's foreign office didn't immediately respond to an email seeking comment.

Khan blamed India's ruling Bharatiya Janata Party (BJP) for "whipping up war hysteria" over claims that India shot down a Pakistani F-16 during the February standoff.

India said it, too, had shot down a Pakistani aircraft and the air force displayed pieces of a missile that it said had been fired by a Pakistani F-16 before it went down.

The success of Indian air strikes on a camp of the Jaish-e-Mohammed militant group in northwestern Pakistan has also been thrown into doubt after satellite images showed little sign of damage.

Pakistan closed its airspace amid the standoff but most commercial air traffic has since resumed and major airports have opened.
