India planning another act of aggression against Pakistan: FM

F.P. Report

ISLAMABAD: Foreign Minister Shah Mehmood Qureshi says Pakistan has credible intelligence reports that India is planning another act of aggression against it between 16th and 20th of this month.

Addressing a news conference in Multan on Sunday, he said in order to justify its military action and increase diplomatic pressure against Pakistan, India can create a new drama in Occupied Kashmir on the pattern of Pulwama.

The Foreign Minister said keeping in view these facts, the Foreign Office immediately decided to hold a meeting of P5 ambassadors.

Foreign Secretary invited the ambassadors of permanent members of UN Security Council and apprised them of Pakistan’s apprehensions on developments taking place in the neighboring country.

The Foreign Secretary impressed upon them that international community should take notice of this dangerous development and stop India.

He said Pakistan acted maturely and responsibly after the 26th February aggression of India and made sincere efforts to deescalate the situation.

Shah Mehmood Qureshi said ceasefire violations in the wake of Pulwama incident have intensified and Indian troops are targeting civilian population of Pakistan, causing a large number of casualties.

He said on 26th of February when India violated Pakistan’s airspace for the first time after 1971, the internationally community remained silent despite knowing that it is a violation of international law and UN charter. International community should break its silence due to flashpoint nature of this region. He said they will have to act responsibly for peace in the world.

He said atrocities and suppression of human rights violations in Occupied Kashmir after the Pulwama incident have increased.

Qureshi reiterated that Pakistan had always supported peaceful struggle of the people of Indian held Kashmiris and it would continue to extend moral and diplomatic support.

The Foreign Minister observed that India made three claims related to surgical strike including targeting of three terrorists camps, killing 350 terrorists, and shooting down F-16 plane of Pakistan and all proved baseless as international community including America has also rejected it.

Shah Mehmood Qureshi, however, hinted at the new planning of Indian attack, terming it could be dangerous for the region.

India resorted to continuous firing at civilian population near LoC following incident of Pulwama.He said, Pakistan had released Indian pilot as a good will gesture for peace of the region as it wanted to de-escalate the situation.

Despite the Indian aggression, he said, Pakistan sent its delegation for dialogue to frame terms and conditions for opening of Kartarpur corridor.

The second phase of dialogue was scheduled for April 2 at Wahga border but India denied these talks.

Foreign Minister said despite all these steps, Pakistan once again, decided to release 360 Indian prisoners as a peace gesture.

Out of frustration India is now doing new planning and we fear of another aggression by India. He said Pakistan has decided to share our information with the international community in order to expose the designs of India.

Shah Mehmood Qureshi said despite all these steps, Pakistan once again, decided to release 360 Indian prisoners as a peace gesture.

He said Pakistan wanted the international community should acknowledge that who was endeavouring for peace and who was putting it in jeopardy.

Out of frustration they are now doing new planning and we fear of another aggression by India. He said Pakistan has decided to share our information with the international community in order to expose the Indian designs . Replying to a question, Foreign Minister Shah Mehmood Qureshi said Pakistan reserves the right to defend itself in case of any aggression.

He said the role played by Pakistan’s armed forces and the nation showed that we are united against belligerence.

Shah Mehmood Qureshi said government and opposition will be on same page when the national security of the country is at stake.

He, however, added that opposition had right for political protests. The government had never denied for talks with opposition parties.
