MEA rejects Pakistan's 'preposterous' claim of an impending Indian attack

Pakistan foreign minister Shah Mehmood Qureshi | Photo Credit: AP

New Delhi: The Ministry of External Affairs (MEA) on Sunday rubbished the Pakistan foreign minister Shah Mehmood Qureshi's claim of India planning another attack like Balakot air strikes against Pakistan between April 16 to 20. The MEA termed the claim as "irresponsible and preposterous" and said that it was aimed at whipping up war-hysteria in the region.

Earlier in the day, Pakistan foreign minister had claimed that they have "reliable information" that India has planned another aggression against Pakistan and according to their information, this action would take place between April 16 and 20. Qureshi had added that ambassadors of the permanent members of the UN Security Council in Islamabad had been informed about "the plan" two days ago.

On being asked by the reporter on the seriousness of his comments Qureshi said, "I am saying it with responsibility and I have a responsible position, I know each word I say would make headlines in the international press."

This has come days after Pakistan Prime Minister Imran Khan accused the BJP-led central government of whipping up national sentiments to win the Lok Sabha elections in India.

Tensions between the two countries have been at all time high after the Februay 14 Pulwama attack where 40 CRPF personnel lost their lives. Pakistan based terror outfit Jaish-e-Mohammed had claimed the responsibility for the attack. In response, India had carried out air strikes on February 26 acorss the Line of Control targeting the JeM militant training camps.

The next day, Paksitan had made an unsuccessful attempt to intrude the Indain airspace. An F-16 of the Pakistan Air Force and a MiG-21 Bison of the IAF had crashed in the dogfight near the LoC.

However, a fresh controversy has emerged in connection with the air strikes after a prominant American magazine quioted anonymous US defence officials as claiming that all the F-16 of the Pakistan are accounted for, terming the IAF's claim of shooting down an F-16 as false.

However, the IAF has refuted the report, in addition to the US defence spokesperson who said that he had no knowledge of any probe regarding the counting of the Pakistan's F-16. IAF has said that it has electronic signatures and Pakistan's radio communication intercepted by it to substantiate its claims of shooting down an F-16.




