Pakistan accuses India of planning offensive

(MENAFN- Kuwait News Agency (KUNA)) ISLAMABAD, April 7 (KUNA) -- Foreign Minister of Pakistan Shah Mehmood Qureshi on Sunday charged that India is planning "another act of aggression against Pakistan." Addressing a news conference in eastern Multan city, Qureshi said, "in order to justify its military action and increase diplomatic pressure against Pakistan, India can create a new drama in Indian administered Kashmir on the pattern of Pulwama between 16th and 20th of this month." Ties between neighboring Pakistan and India have been tense since a suicide bombing in Pulwama, Indian administered Kashmir, killed over 40 Indian soldiers. India blamed Pakistan of being complicit in the attack; a charge Islamabad has denied vehemently.



The Foreign Minister said "keeping in view these facts, the Foreign Office immediately decided to hold a meeting of P5 ambassadors." Foreign Secretary invited the ambassadors of permanent members of UN Security Council and apprised them of Pakistan's apprehensions on developments taking place in the neighboring country. The Foreign Secretary impressed upon them that international community should take notice of this dangerous development and stop India.



Following the Pulwama attack, Pakistan military captured a pilot after his aircraft was shot down in Pakistani territory by a Pakistan Air Force (PAF) jet and handed over the pilot to Indian authorities in a gesture of peace. Referring to the gesture of peace, Qureshi said Pakistan acted maturely and responsibly after the 26th February "aggression of India and made sincere efforts to deescalate the situation." He said on 26th of February when India violated Pakistan's airspace for the first time after 1971, the internationally community remained silent despite knowing that it is a violation of international law and UN charter. International community should break its silence due to flashpoint nature of this region. The Foreign Minister said ceasefire violations in the wake of Pulwama incident have intensified and Indian troops are "targeting civilian population of Pakistan, causing a large number of casualties." He said they will have to act responsibly for peace in the world, charging that "atrocities and suppression of human rights violations in Indian administered Kashmir after the Pulwama incident have increased." Qureshi reiterated that Pakistan had always supported peaceful struggle of the people of Kashmir and it would continue to extend moral and diplomatic support.



He, however, hinted at "the new planning of Indian attack, terming it could be dangerous for the region." He said Pakistan has decided to share "our information with the international community in order to expose the designs of India." The statement by the Foreign Minister came on the day when Pakistan released 100 Indian fishermen from southern Karachi Jail as a goodwill gesture.



They will be taken to Lahore city and handed over to Indian authorities at eastern Wagah Border. These fishermen had been arrested for illegal fishing in Pakistani waters. Qureshi also said any "Indian aggression will have serious consequences as Pakistan would be left with no other option but to respond in kind." (end) sbk.rk

MENAFN0704201900710000ID1098357103
