MEA rejects Pakistan minister's attack claims as irresponsible, vows counter-terror actions

The Ministry of External Affairs (MEA) has rejected Pakistan's claims of India planning an attack on the neighbours. In a statement on Sunday night, MEA called Pakistan Foreign Minister's statements "irresponsible and preposterous".

In the statement, MEA spokesperson Raveesh Kumar said, "India rejects the irresponsible and preposterous statement by the Foreign Minister of Pakistan with a clear objective of whipping up war hysteria in the region. This public gimmick appears to be a call to Pakistan-based terrorists to undertake a terror attack in India."

Earlier in the day, Reuters quoted Pakistan minister Shah Mahmood Qureshi as saying, "We have reliable intelligence that India is planning a new attack on Pakistan. As per our information this could take place between April 16 and 20."

Qureshi did not elaborate on what evidence Pakistan had or how he could be so specific with the timing, but he said Prime Minister Imran Khan had agreed to share the information with the country.

Hitting back, the Centre has said in its statement, "It has been made clear to Pakistan that it cannot absolve itself of responsibility of a cross border terrorist attack in India. No attempt at creating an alibi for its complicity in such attacks will succeed."

"Pakistan needs to take credible and irreversible steps against terrorism operating from all territories under its control rather than making hysterical statements to obfuscate the core issue that bedevils our region: cross- border terrorism. Pakistan has been advised to use established diplomatic and DGMO channels to share any actionable and credible intelligence it has about imminent terror attacks."

The government further added, "India reserves the right to respond firmly and decisively to any cross border terrorist attack."

On Saturday, Pakistan PM Imran Khan criticised the BJP government for creating a war hysteria over the downed F-16 fighter jet.

(With inputs from Geeta Mohan)
