India vs Pakistan: Is India planning another attack on Pakistan? Warning issued

India Pakistan: Crossfire breaks out in Poonch district

top stories direct to your inbox SUBSCRIBE Invalid email Sign up to receive our rundown of the day'sdirect to your inbox We use your sign-up to provide content in ways you've consented to and to improve our understanding of you. This may include adverts from us and 3rd parties based on our understanding. You can unsubscribe at any time. More info

India launched a series of airstrikes on Pakistan-occupied Kashmir on February 17, in a bid to flush out terrorist group Jaish-e-Mohammed. The military action came after a suicide bombing in Indian-administered Kashmir on February 14 left 46 soldiers dead. Pakistan retaliated by shooting down planes responsible for the air raids and capturing Indian Wing Commander pilot Abhinandan Varthaman. After his release, a fragile ceasefire resumed between the countries, but things could soon change according to claims made by Pakistani officials.

Is India planning another attack on Pakistan? Pakistan has come forward with claims of “reliable intelligence” showing Indian authorities are planning another attack on Pakistan-occupied Kashmir. Shah Mahmood Qureshi, Federal Minister for Foreign Affairs in Pakistan’s government, made the announcement today. Talking in an official statement from his hometown of Multan, he said: "We have reliable intelligence that India is planning a new attack on Pakistan."

India vs Pakistan: Is India planning another attack on Pakistan? Warning issued

“As per our information, this could take place between April 16 and 20.” According to Mr Qureshi, the official announcement was made with the assent of Pakistani Prime Minister Imran Khan. However Indian officials have been quick to dismiss the claims, and accused officials of whipping up “war hysteria”. A spokesman from India’s Foreign Office said: "India rejects the irresponsible and preposterous statement by the foreign minister of Pakistan with a clear objective of whipping up war hysteria in the region.

Shah Mahmood Qureshi announced the intelligence findings today

"This public gimmick appears to be a call to Pakistan-based terrorists to undertake a terror attack in India." India's ruling Bharatiya Janata Party (BJP) – which Pakistan Prime Minister Imran Khan has previously blamed for igniting “hysteria” - is currently running for reelection in India. Incumbent Prime Minister Narendra Modi is vying for a second term in office, as elections approach on April 11. While he has been hailed a success for his stance against Pakistan, he has been blamed for major divisions in India’s public.

Imran Khan has been particularly critical of India's leading regime
