India planning another military aggression: FM

MULTAN: Foreign Minister Shah Mehmood Qureshi said on Sunday the government had reliable intelligence that India was planning to carry out aggression against the motherland between April 16 and 20.

Talking to reporters here, Qureshi said the ambassadors of the permanent members of the UN Security Council in Islamabad had already been informed about “the plan” two days ago. “We have reliable intelligence that India has made a new scheme and the planning is under way and there are chances of another aggression against Pakistan and according to our information this action can take place between April 16 and 20,” he said.

“I am saying it with responsibility and I have a responsible position, I know each word I say would make headlines in the international press,” he said, stressing the reliability of his statement. He said the planned aggression was aimed at “increasing diplomatic pressure against Pakistan”.

Qureshi said Pakistan was ready to defend against India’s misadventure. As per the wishes of the nation and international laws, Pakistan would respond effectively, he added. Following the Pulwama incident, he said the Narendra Modi (Indian prime minister) government created war hysteria and put regional peace in jeopardy for his political gains.

Qureshi said Pakistan always behaved as a responsible state but India’s behaviour had always been irresponsible. He said recently Modi chaired a meeting of cabinet committee on security in which the heads of Indian forces sought permission for aggression against Pakistan and Modi gave them a freehand.

He said Pakistan was drawing world attention towards the expected aggression, as India could attack military targets. India could stage a Pulwama-like incident again to justify its misadvanture against Pakistan, he added. The foreign minister said Pakistan wanted the international community to take notice of India’s irresponsible attitude and restrain it from damaging regional peace.

Qureshi said when India violated the Line of Control (LoC) and Pakistani air space, the world community remained silent. He said the international community should not be a silent spectator rather it should play role for maintaining peace in the region.

The foreign minister said Indian atrocities on innocent Kashmiris in Indian occupied Kashmir had also increased. He reiterated Pakistan had always supported peaceful struggle of the people of Indian held Kashmir and it would continue to extend moral and diplomatic support.

Qureshi observed India made three claims related to surgical strike including targeting of three terrorists camps, killing 350 terrorists, and shooting down F-16 plane of Pakistan and all proved baseless as international community, including America, had rejected those claims.

The foreign minister, however, hinted at the new planning of Indian attack, saying it could be dangerous for the region. He said Pakistan had released Indian pilot as a goodwill gesture for regional peace as it wanted to de-escalate the situation.

Despite the Indian aggression, he said, Pakistan sent its delegation for dialogue to frame terms and conditions for the opening of Kartarpur corridor. The second phase of the dialogue was scheduled for April 2 at Wagah border but India denied those talks, he said.

Despite all those steps, Pakistan once again decided to release 360 Indian prisoners as a peace gesture, Qureshi said, and added Pakistan wanted the international community to acknowledge who was endeavouring for peace and who was putting it in jeopardy.

He said Pakistan always wished for peace and it would continue the same spirit in future. Talks were the only way forward to settle Kashmir dispute and other issues between the two nuclear states.

Responding to a query, the foreign minister categorically, stated Pakistan reserved the right to safeguard its frontiers. The morale of Pakistan armed forces and masses was very high and they were united against any sort of aggression.

Responding to another question, Qureshi said the government and opposition were on the same page on national security. He, however, added opposition had right for political protests.
