Islamabad on Art 370, Pak recognises accession of J&K!

editorial@tribune.com

Arun Joshi

The Pakistan foreign office has come out in support of the retention of Article 370 of the Indian Constitution, saying its revocation would violate the UN resolutions on Kashmir. This is ironical. Perhaps Pakistan has recognised, though belatedly, the accession of Jammu and Kashmir to India through which the safeguards guaranteed to the people of the state by Maharaja Hari Singh have been enshrined in the Article 370 of the Indian Constitution.

There are two ways of looking at what Pakistan has stated on Article 370. One, that it should not be revoked because that would violate the UN resolutions on Kashmir. A simple interpretation of it is that it is fuelling fears of those who are apprehensive of the demographic change in case the plebiscite is ever held. This is hypothetical and based on ifs that have no basis. Pakistan is showing its solidarity with the political spectrum in the Valley that is up against the ruling BJP, that has set a deadline for the removal of the special status of the state, and responded that Kashmir’s relation with India would be over then and there itself.

Pakistan felt emboldened to step in this discourse because of this nature of the debate.

Second, Pakistan is seeking to whitewash its footprints of terrorism in Jammu and Kashmir by siding with the political and religious sentiments of the Kashmiri Muslims in the Kashmir valley with the use of its camouflage phrase of “moral, political and diplomatic support” for Kashmiris, while, in reality, promoting militancy and violence.

Pakistan’s foreign ministry, perhaps, forgot that the Article 370 and Article 35A exist in the Constitution of India because of the accession of the state to India. Its defence of Article 370 is an acceptance of the accession of Jammu and Kashmir to India. The accession was for the whole of the state, including the parts that are controlled by Pakistan.

History has its own obligation to posterity

Let’s bring 1947 into focus for a moment – Maharaja Hari Singh, Dogra king of Jammu and Kashmir, decides to stay independent. A standstill agreement is signed between J&K and Pakistan. That meant that Pakistan recognised J&K as an independent entity and its king as the sole decision maker of its fate. Pakistan, its army regulars and tribesmen invaded the state in violation of the international law The Maharaja signs instrument of accession with India to seek its military help to repulse Pakistan attack. The matter goes to the United Nations, profiling Pakistan as an aggressor. The UN resolutions are passed. The first clause of the resolution No. 47 of April 21, 1948, calls on Pakistan to withdraw all its army personnel, tribesmen and other nationals from the state of J&K. Pakistan has not done that till date, hence rendering the whole UN resolution infructuous.

That being Pakistani part and its usual mischievous attempts to fan anti-India narrative in Kashmir. Today’s fact is that it has happened because parties touched off sensitive issues in the election campaign, while those are yet to be heard and decided by the Supreme Court. This is what happens when there are attempts to destablise the system for electoral gains. Hostile neighbours always look for theirs as trouble makers.
