Fourth in 2014, Congress hopes to turn the tide in Dhaulana this time

DHAULANA: The Congress is eyeing 1.75 lakh minority and Brahmin votes in Dhaulana, where the party had stood fourth in the 2014 Lok Sabha polls, garnering a mere 12.7% votes. Sources said Priyanka Gandhi ’s “superb” roadshow in Ghaziabad last week had instilled a renewed vigour in the party, which is leaving no stone unturned to consolidate votes in rural areas.The Congress has fielded Dolly Sharma, a Brahmin, from Ghaziabad. In Dhaulana, Brahmins and minorities account for 1.75 lakh of the 4 lakh voters in this area.However, the Congress’s performance in Dhaulana was far from satisfactory in the 2014 general election. In the Dhaulana (partial) constituency, BJP’s Gen VK Singh (retd) had cornered 46% of the total votes polled followed by the SP, which garnered 20%, BSP 17% and the Congress 12.68%.This time, however, the Congress is confident of bagging a large chunk of the votes. Party workers said Priyanka’s roadshow, coupled with an apparent anger among people at the incumbent MP not turning up frequently in the past five years, had left them enthused.Deepak Atrey, the Congress’s general secretary in Hapur, said: “Our calculation says we have the support of over 80% Muslims. After the selection of Dolly Sharma, a large section of the Brahmin community has pledged support to the Congress.”According to him, there are 58,000 Rajputs, 48,000 Brahmins and 1.25 lakh Muslims in the constituency.Atrey said party workers have been campaigning on promises such as building hospital and schools in the area. “There is no government school in the area. There is only one 30-bed hospital in Dhaulana and the area gets power for just for 8 to 10 hours a day. The sugarcane farmers have not been paid their dues. People are responding to our promises and we hope to garner good support,” he said.Maulana A Ahmed Khan Razzaqui, president of All India Ulema Council who had recently joined the Congress from the Samajwadi Party, said: “Priyanka Gandhi has brought new vigour among party workers. The party has been out of UP for the past several decades. Leaders, who had been sitting at home, are now coming out and campaigning for the party.”According to the sources, after Priyanka’s roadshow, party workers are now trying to bring in Congress president Rahul Gandhi for a public meeting in Ghaziabad on April 9, the last day of canvassing for the first phase of elections.The residents, however, are yet to decide who they will vote on April 11. Vakeel (26), a scrap dealer and resident of Sikera village, said: “I have attended rallies of both the Congress and the SP-BSP, just to see who has brought the stronger candidate to the arena. The village elders are telling us to vote for the party that will give the BJP a tough fight. In case the community votes get divided, it will benefit the BJP.”
