Pakistan warns India over alleged plans of possible military action

Xinhua | Updated: 2019-04-08 10:34

Pakistan's Foreign Minister Shah Mahmood Qureshi. [Photo/VCG]

ISLAMABAD -- Pakistan's Ministry of Foreign Affairs here on Sunday summoned Indian deputy high commissioner and warned India over its alleged plans to carry out some military action against Pakistan in the coming days, an official said.

Spokesperson of the ministry Mohammad Faisal told local Urdu TV Channel Dawn News that the foreign ministry handed a demarche to the deputy high commissioner to convey Islamabad's protest and objections.

"India has been strongly warned by Pakistan in case of any misadventure," said the spokesperson, adding that India should expect a fitting response from Pakistan if the former resorts to any aggression.

The warning came after Pakistan's Foreign Minister Shah Mahmood Qureshi told a press conference on Sunday that India is planning more military action against Pakistan in the third week of April.

"I hold a position of responsibility. I am aware of what I am saying and know that it will be noticed by the international media. We had reliable intelligence that India is devising a new plan. There are chances of another attack against Pakistan," the minister said.

The minister said if India executes its plans, it would impact greatly on the peace and stability of the region and added that Pakistan wants the international community to take notice of the irresponsible behavior and reprimand India for taking any action.

The relations between Pakistan and India got tense after a suicide attack in Indian-controlled Kashmir killed at least 40 Indian security personnel on Feb. 14. Following the suicide attack, Indian Prime Minister Narendra Modi said India will give "a befitting reply" to Pakistan.

Later on Feb. 26, Indian warplanes violated Pakistani airspace and claimed to hit a training camp of Jaish-e-Mohammad, a Kashmiri militant organization allegedly involved in the suicide attack.

Pakistan announced that it have shot down two Indian fighter jets for violation of its territory a day later and arrested an Indian pilot who was released later as a gesture of peace.
