Election Pathshala: What is Model Code of Conduct?

MCC is meant to ensure that the elections in the country are fair, unbiased and free from any external control (Representative Image).

New Delhi: As the 2019 Lok Sabha Elections are inching closer, all the political parties in the country are trying to pitch themselves to the voters. From elaborate campaigns to new policies, the political parties of the country are leaving no stone unturned to ensure their victory.

Though the political parties are bringing new policies and schemes to the table, there is a restriction put on them by the Election Commission. The Model Code of Conduct is what defines the direction of election campaigns throughout the country.

A universal set of guidlines meant for all the parties in the country, the MCC has now come into force in the country. The MCC came into implementation the day the dates of the elections were announced. MCC is meant to ensure that the elections in the country are fair, unbiased and free from any external control.

The MCC ensures that the party in power does not enjoy special privileges during the elections. The ruling party is not allowed to introduce a new policy or scheme after the dates of the elections are announced. The MCC bars the ruling party from using government machinery for the elections. Questions were raised on the implementation of the MCC after citizens saw photos of Narendra Modi on air and railway tickets after the announcement of election dates.

The MCC keeps in mind that the elections do not hamper or hinder the lifestyle of the citizens. No rallies can be conducted without prior permission and are supposed to end by 10 pm. In 2004, LK Advani's speech was stopped by the then Patna DM Gautam Goswami. Goswami went up to the stage, blocked the microphone with his hand and told the then Union Minister that it was time for him to wind up.

The Model Code of Conduct first came into force in 1960 in the Kerala Assembly elections. After this, all political parties were consulted before bringing the MCC into force in 1962. The MCC has a total of eight provisions. In case a candidate violates the MCC, the EC is the first to be informed. The MCC is not a law, therefore, in case of a violation, action is taken as per the CrPC, IPC and the People's Representation Act.

Following constant violations of the MCC, the EC issued a new notice stating that candidated are not allowed to pitch voters using communal sentiments or caste. The notice also warned the politicians against criticizing their opponents based on random allegations and their personal lives. To curb the violations all the more, the EC has launched a social media platform called 'CVigil'. Using CVigil, the citizens can upload violations to the Election Commission.
