Welcome Bellevision.com

India rejects Pakistan’s claim of another attack plan

The MEA spokesperson’s statement came hours after Mr. Qureshi said in a press conference in Multan that Pakistan has “reliable intelligence” that India is planning to attack Pakistan again between April 16 and 20.

New Delhi, 08 Apr: India on Sunday rejected as “irresponsible and preposterous” Pakistan Foreign Minister Shah Mahmood Qureshi’s comments that India was planning to attack Pakistan again between April 16 and 20.

In a strongly worded statement, External Affairs Ministry spokesperson Raveesh Kumar said the comments by the Pakistani Foreign Minister were aimed at whipping up war hysteria in the region.

‘Public gimmick’

“India rejects the irresponsible and preposterous statement by the Foreign Minister of Pakistan with a clear objective of whipping up war hysteria in the region. This public gimmick appears to be a call to Pakistan-based terrorists to undertake a terror attack in India,” Mr. Kumar said.

The MEA spokesperson’s statement came hours after Mr. Qureshi said at a press conference in Multan that Pakistan had “reliable intelligence” that India was planning to attack Pakistan again between April 16 and 20.

Mr. Qureshi claimed that ambassadors of the permanent members of the UN Security Council in Islamabad had been informed about “the plan” two days ago.

“We have reliable intelligence that India has made a new scheme and the planning is under way and there are chances of another aggression against Pakistan and according to our information this action can take place between April 16 and 20,” he said.

‘Responsible position’

“I am saying it with responsibility and I have a responsible position, I know each word I say would make headlines in the international press,” he said, stressing the reliability of his claim.

Mr. Qureshi said the planned aggression was aimed at “increasing diplomatic pressure against Pakistan.”

India struck the biggest training camp of the terror group, Jaish-e-Muhammed, deep inside Pakistan on February 26 nearly two weeks after the Pulwama terror attack in which 40 CRPF personnel were killed.

On February 27, the Pakistan Air Force retaliated and downed a MiG-21 in an aerial combat and captured an IAF pilot, who was handed over to India on March 1.
