Today's world news: What you need to know

The international stories making headlines around the world today:

Rebel forces press Tripoli government

Photo: AFP

In Libya, fighting is intensifying between rebel forces and those of the internationally recognised government.

The UN-backed government said 21 people were killed and 27 were wounded in fighting near the capital, Tripoli.

The United States has demanded an immediate halt to the offensive by Libyan rebel warlord Khalifa Haftar.

The government is threatening a counter offensive against Mr Haftar's stronghold in the east.

- BBC

Read the full story:

Renewed tensions between India and Pakistan

Pakistan says it has "reliable intelligence" India is planning a military attack this month, something India dismissed as "war hysteria".

Already tense relations between the two deteriorated this year when Pakistan-based militants killed dozens of Indian troops in Indian-administered Kashmir.

India begins its month-long general elections laster this week.

- BBC

UK govt proposes to fine websites over 'online harms'

Photo: AP / AFP/ 123rf

Britain's Department for Culture, Media and Sport has proposed an independent watchdog and a code of practice that tech companies would have to follow.

Under it, failure to tackle "online harms" - terrorist propoganda, child abuse, so-called revenge pornography, hate crimes, harassment and "fake news" - could lead websites to be fined or blocked.

The regulator would have the power to fine companies and publish notices naming and shaming those that break the rules.

One think tank called the plans a "historic attack" on freedom of speech.

Read the full story:

US Homeland Security Secretary Kirstjen Nielsen steps down

Photo: AP

Donald Trump says Homeland Security Secretary Kirstjen Nielsen is leaving her job amid growing frustration by the administration over the number of southern border crossings.

Ms Nielsen, who is 46, has held the position since December 2017.

Mr Trump said Kevin McAleenan, the current US Customs and Border Protection Commissioner, would become acting secretary.

Mr McAleenan is a longtime border official who is well respected by members of Congress and within the administration.

- ABC

Read the full story:

London moves to clean up its air

London has begun enforcing a scheme to clean up its polluted air through an ultra-low emission zone for vehicles in the city centre.

Transport accounts for about half of all emissions of nitrogen oxide, which are associated with increased risks of asthma, cancer and stroke.

- BBC
