Man meets woman on matrimonial site, harasses her when rejected his proposal

matrimonial site

harasses

life partner

Bangalore

By Amit KumarMan meets woman on, when she rejects proposal heher, sisterAll this woman wanted to do was find afor her sister and what did she get instead? A stalker, who terrorised both of them, and who even tried to attack them.A techie uploaded the profile of her younger sister on a popular matrimonial site. Jyothi Krishnan (36), a software engineer and a resident of Electronics City, approached the elder sister with a marriage proposal.The younger sister and Krishnan became friends and started going out. However, when the elder sister met Jyothi Krishnan, she was not convinced about the choice.She also did not approve of Krishnan’s behaviour. It is alleged that during the courtship period, Krishnan and the younger sister got into some financial transactions too.But when the elder sister rejected the proposal, the younger one also decided to move on. This decision did not go well with Krishnan, who is said to have started harassing both the sisters to change their decision.Krishnan also sent them offensive messages on WhatsApp. He also went near the accused went near victim’s house and created a ruckus in February. Then Krishnan started threatening the younger sister and used to block her way and he is accused of trying to assault her. After receiving repeated threats from Krishnan, the sisters registered an FIR against Jyothi Krishnan at Puttenahalli police station and he was taken into custody.The complaint filed by the victims states, “I uploaded my sister’s profile on the matrimonial site. Jyothi Krishnan approached us for a marriage. Later there was a change in his behaviour which I didn’t like and refused his marriage proposal. He was constantly harassing me and my sister through messages and e-mails. He also threatened to kill us if my sister doesn’t agree to marry him,” the complaint stated.An official from the police station toldMirror, “The complainant’s sister and accused had some financial issues and they had also rejected his proposal, which made the accused furious. The accused has been taken into custody.”The FIR has been registered at Puttenahalli police station under the sections 342 (Wrongful confinement), 354(A) (Punishment for sexual harassment), 354(D) (Follows woman despite her objection), 354(B) (Assault or criminal force to woman with intent to disrobe), 506 (Criminal intimidation), 504 (intentional insult), 120B (Punishment for criminal conspiracy).
