World forces conspiring to put Pakistan on FATF blacklist: Qureshi

MULTAN: Foreign Minister Shah Mehmood Qureshi has claimed that some international forces are conspiring to put Pakistan on the black list of the Financial Action Task Force (FATF) and the government was making efforts to foil these designs.

Addressing a reception, organised in his honour in PP-217 constituency here on Monday, he said the country was already included in the gray list and the foreign ministry was performing its responsibilities in quite professional manner to foil all conspiracies against the country.

Qureshi believed that India would not commit a mistake of attacking Pakistan. He warned that if India committed any aggression against Pakistan, it would face serious consequences. Pakistan has the right to defend itself according to the international laws, he added.

He said Pakistan was observing restraint to end tension with India and its positive gesture for peace should not be construed as its weakness. The entire world has realised Indian aggressive designs, and Pakistan had told the world community to prevent it from any aggression. The international community should not keep mum on the issue now due to sensitivity of the issue.

Qureshi said on the other hand, Pakistan was releasing Indian prisoners as a goodwill gesture. Pakistan had released Indian pilot under same passion and the country was releasing war prisoners as a goodwill gesture and expecting the same gesture from the neighbouring country.

Criticising rights violations in Kashmir, he said that India had increased intensity of operations in held Kashmir. It has increased tyrannies against innocent Kashmiris and the international community should not close its eyes to massive rights violations in Kashmir. Pakistan had supported cause of Kashmir in the past and extended support to Kashmiris at diplomatic, legal and moral levels, and it would continue doing so in future.

He said the government and opposition were on the same page over national security issues. He said that he understands the problems of the opposition, but this is time to demonstrate unity. The opposition is free to do politics, but this is the time of unity.

He said Asif Ali Zardari and Hamza Shahbaz Sharif were responsible for current economic crises of the country and Pakistan put in gray list due to their money laundering. He said PTI government was making utmost efforts to take out the country from economic crises under the leadership Imran Khan and the efforts would produce positive results. The job opportunities would open for youth when the economy would be strengthened.

He said the 54 countries of the OIC held meeting in Istanbul after New Zeeland incident had incorporated four points from his speech in unanimous recommendations.

Qureshi also visited Kot Mithan where he attended the marriage ceremony of son of Khwaja Moenuddin Koreja.
