Don’t overlook Pakistan’s silence for not drum beating losses on Indian side, DG ISPR tells India

RAWALPINDI: Pakistan Army’s spokesman has rejected repetitions of Indian claims that it downed a Pakistan’s F-16 fighter jet in a brief aerial dogfight in February, telling India that "repetitions don’t make truth of a lie".

In a tweet, Inter-Services Public Relations (ISPR) Director General Maj-Gen Asif Ghafoor wrote: “Repetitions don’t make the truth of a lie. Despite claiming possession of evidence on shooting F-16, IAF still short of presenting it. “

The military spokesperson also warned India by adding that “Don’t overlook Pakistan’s silence for not drum beating losses on Indian side. Fact is that PAF shot down two IAF jets, wreckage seen on ground by all.”

The DG ISPR’s tweets came in response to Indian Air Force (IAF) officials’ press conference on Monday, in which they claimed again that that they have "irrefutable evidence" that Pakistan used an F-16 fighter jet in the dogfight which was shot down by its MiG-21 Bison.

Earlier, Indian repetition of claims was debunked by two senior US defence officials, who with direct knowledge of the situation told US Magazine Foreign Policy that the US personnel recently counted F-16s in Pakistan and found none missing.

US officials expose India’s claim of downing ... 10:17 AM | 5 Apr, 2019 LAHORE - A leading international magazine ‘Foreign Policy’ has rejected Indian claim of shooting down ...

The Magazine said that India has once again misled the world through baseless and false claims.

It said that “The findings directly contradict the account of Indian Air Force officials, who said that Wing Commander Abhinandan Varthaman managed to shoot down a Pakistani F-16 before his own plane was downed by a Pakistani missile.”

Earlier this month, Maj Gen Asif Ghafoor took to Twitter and disclosed that Pakistan has been in possession of the remains of all four missiles carried by the MiG-21 aircraft which crashed in Pakistan’s territory after the Feb 27 clash.

ISPR adds to Modi's miseries with 'damaging' ... 10:45 PM | 5 Apr, 2019 RAWALPINDI - Pakistan Army's media wing served a fresh blow to the Indian Air Force and Prime Minister Narendra Modi as ...

The armed forces spokesman also shared pictorial evidence to bolster his claims stating that the ‘seeker heads’ of all four missiles were intact which means they were never fired.
