Life is a preparation to die

Sunil Kumar is currently member, managing committee, Ramakrishna Mission, New Delhi. An engineer and project manager trained at Vickers Armstrong Engineers and Babcox & Wilcox, UK, he is a former general manager of The Projects and Equipment Corporation of India, Ministry of Commerce and Consultant, NIDC, Ministry of Industry. Sunil has been member of a high-power government committee for value orientation in Planning Commission and In-charge of Value Education Programmes of Ramakrishna Mission, New Delhi. He has written books on Vedanta, managerial effectiveness – Indian Insights, human values, etc. His passion lies in applying Indian wisdom & Vivekananda’s principles to managerial situations. His vision and managerial expertise led to the setting up of a unique PGDBM Management Institute in Delhi, called SriSIM, of which he was a Founder Trustee and Professor and which offered education in Indian ethos based Management. He is currently taking the message of Vedanta-centric human development to public servants through programs on ‘Ethics in Governance. LESS ... MORE

1. Is death a one-time experience as some religions and people believe, or have we all experienced death, as we the Bharati, affirm? We believe that we all have experienced death; not just once but many times, and having suffered many a times while dying, we’re now afraid of dying. If it is the first time that we’re going to die why do we consider death a form of suffering? Why’re we afraid of dying and hate to die? Why do we gladly throw away all our hard-earned money to avoid death or consider death the highest judicial punishment? Why do we wish to live, of course happily, and don’t wish to die?

2. Facing Death calmly, without fear: Since we have no escape from death, it is wise to learn how to face it. We must accept the idea of death and instead of being afraid, we may feel a sense of excitement, and having made preparations over the years, we should be able to meet the challenge of death effectively, explains Dalai Lama. He adds, my will to live is equal to my excitement of facing death; I wonder how I will cope when actually faced with it, though I daily practice facing death, by visualization and training the mind. At one level it means cultivating a sincere, compassionate motivation and performing positive actions, serving others. It means learning to control the mind, becoming familiar with the idea of death without fearing it. Making life meaningful and useful to society, is the best preparation. Spiritual practices leave good imprints on the mind. Sincere, continuous prayers for well-being and happiness of all should become our habit. Start now because ‘tomorrow’ or ‘next life’, we don’t know which will come first!

3. Let us investigate how Bharat looks at life and death: As a Bharati we believe in rebirth in good or bad conditions, depending on our deeds. Some religions may not believe in rebirth per se. However, by accepting the idea of a ‘day of Judgment’ or ‘heaven and hell’, they don’t negate the idea of ‘life after death’ but do accept that death is not the end and there is something beyond death also, which is akin to the idea of rebirth; that death is not the ultimate end of life.

All religions caution us to be careful of how we live because whatever happens after death, heaven or hell, has to be based on the principle of “as you sow, so shall you reap”, of “Cause-effect”, of “law of karma”. It therefore follows that we’re not born equal with a clean mind, but we are born unequal, with each mind carrying the ‘seeds and its consequences’, of its own past thoughts, words, deeds, i.e. samskaras’ or inherited tendencies. So, this life itself, could be considered as the ‘day-of-judgment or heaven-hell’.

4. Is there life after death – what Bharat believes: We believe that all living beings are in the process of evolution towards experiencing their oneness with the whole creation, and this is the purpose of life, particularly of human beings, who have the freedom to choose their actions and are therefore responsible for its consequences. And, till we expand our limited-body-mind-linked-consciousness to become one with the whole infinite blissful consciousness, we have to be born and die, again and again till we reach oneness. Why? Because being of the nature of infinite consciousness, we will never be satisfied with our limited body-mind-consciousness in which we’re now trapped, and we will keep struggling unless we ‘regain’ (Latin meaning of Religion) our oneness with the ‘whole’. Therefore, while living we’ve to first learn of our ‘infinitude’, of our oneness with the whole creation, and then we’ve to learn how can we continuously expand. And, the universal answer is to live a virtuous life, fulfilling our duties. Unfortunately, this profound mystery of life and death is not being shared with the modern generation.

5. Dying is an integral part of living: While dying, the gross part of mind and brain remain connected and till then others can remind us to generate holy, positive states of mind – that is why a preacher is called and we name our children as Rama, Shyama, etc. so that a holy name should appear in the last moments of awareness, till the brain stops functioning. Thereafter, we go beyond gross to subtle consciousness states of the mind. No outside words reach us. Only the subtle part of mind carrying all our samskaras, impressions, continues to remain and guides us to life after death. And, therefore it is so very important to be careful of the samskaras we’re acquiring every moment by our thoughts, motives, words, deeds.

6. Who should teach us how to live and die happily and peacefully? Our mother is our first teacher and therefore Bhartiya culture teaches us to respect our mother as a goddess, because it is she who literally helps us to stand on our own feet and, she and the family can not only teach us to be good but establish us in good habits, values, disciplines, from a very young age. Thereafter we’ve many others as teachers who besides teaching the 3R’s also have an obligation to be a role model of “living well”, as ‘Acharya’.

Unfortunately, religious leaders and preachers, who were mainly responsible to teach us about “living well”, have today totally failed to be good examples. They have become narrow and divisive and have therefore, failed to come together on a common platform, to join hands with the academia to use the more than 10-15 years of schooling to teach us the art of “living and dying well”. Perhaps schooling should now inspire and help us get established in a daily routine of prayers, worship, work-as-worship, etc. to build the ability to follow righteous conduct so that we may be able to face death calmly not fearfully.

7. Whether atheists or religious we’ve to keep reminding ourselves that nothing we work for in life, be it wealth, power, fame, friends, family can help at death. The only thing that will help after the brain stops functioning are our good or bad deeds whose memory has become impressed in our subtle mind.

Facebook Twitter Linkedin Email Disclaimer Views expressed above are the author's own.
