Pollution a major poll plank in Vizag West

Workers are the most neglected lot in this segment, says CPI candidate

Visakhapatnam West Assembly constituency is in for an interesting poll battle as the TDP and YSRCP are banking upon on the development plank while the CPI has made industrial pollution as its major poll plank.

The TDP has fielded two-time MLA P.G.V.R. Naidu while his old rival Malla Vijay Prasad is contesting the election on the YSRCP ticket. The Jana Sena Party-Left alliance has fielded CPI State assistant secretary J.V. Satyanarayana Murthy from the segment carved out of Pendurti after reorganisation. The 2014 polls saw the YSRCP losing with a huge margin of 30,857 votes. Dadi Ratnakar, son of senior leader D. Veerabhadra Rao, contested from the constituency.

CPI candidate J.V. Satyanarayana Murthy says industrial pollution remains a major issue. “Already, HPCL and Coromandel are going in for expansion of their units in the constituency. The TDP government is outrightly pushing more industries. Whenever we raise a voice against it, false cases are being foisted upon us,” Mr. Murthy says.

Despite the expansion of industries including the PSUs, employment opportunities still elude local workforce, allege the voters.

Referring to the welfare of workers in unorganised sector, he alleges that the workers who constitute a majority in this segment are the ignored lot. “Neither does the ruling party nor the Opposition work in favour of the working class,” he says.

Taking a dog at the government housing scheme, Mr. Murthy complain that though housing projects were taken up on a big scale in the past, it had hardly made a difference to the homeless and slum dwellers. “The selection of beneficiaries of the housing schemes is marred in irregularities, interference of middlemen middlemen and nepotism,” he alleges.

Mr. Murty is confident that the JSP-CPI-BSP combine will give a stiff fight to the ruling party.

NAD flyover

Mr. P.G.V.R. Naidu claims that the TDP government has done a lot of welfare in the segment. Referring to the new flyover works at the NAD Junction, he says it would ease the perennial traffic congestion in the area.

“Though it took time, a bypass road at NSTL has been laid. A parallel road is also coming up connecting it to Simhachalam side,” he says. A top priority has been given to healthcare with Gopalapatnam hospital working as a round-the-clock maternity hospital. Six CM Arogya Kendras are functioning, he says. Long-pending problem of residents at Ramamurthypantulupeta underpass was constructed and another at Old Gopalapatnam is nearing completion, he says.

“Sports infrastructure in schools has been improved with the indoor stadium at Gopalapatnam. Another is coming up at Sriharipuram. Six outdoor playgrounds have also been developed,” he says.

Asserting that welfare measures would stand him in good stead, he said 8,000 houses and 13,000 pattas have been distributed to beneficiaries. Even the Simhachalam land issue was solved with many getting it free of cost, he said.

Mr. P.G.V.R. Naidu, who contested as Praja Rajyam Party nominee in 2009 polls, says though the JSP is in the fray, it would split the anti-incumbency votes.

YSRCP nominee Mr. Malla Vijay Prasad claims that most of the works pertaining to the sanctioning of NAD flyover was done by him.

‘Anytime Malla’ card

“The bed strength of the Gopalapatnam hospital will be increased to 50, if the YSRCP is voted to power. The 24x7 water supply scheme at Malkapuram will be revived. I will stand by people with my ‘Anytime Malla’ (ATM) card,” he added.

Mr. Prasad adds that the presence of former city Congress president Behera Bhaskara Rao in the YSRCP would strengthen his chances. The BJP has fielded Buddha Chandrasekhar, who joined the party after 2014 elections.
