Inter Result 2019: TS Inter 1st 2nd Year Result not releasing on April 10 - here is what board officials say

TS 1st 2nd Year Inter Result 2019 - updates | Photo Credit: Representative Image

TS Inter Result 2019 Update @ 10 am: TSBIE officials have now confirmed that the report of TS Inter Result 2019 releasing today on April 10 is fake. The board officials contacted have now confirmed that the board had shared that the evaluation process would be completed by April 10. There was no news that the TS Inter 1st and 2nd year result 2019 would be releasing today. Furthermore, the board has not shared any new update on the declaration date of inter result.

Also, due to polling in the state for Lok Sabha Elections, TS Inter Result would not be released tomorrow as well. More updates on dates, as and when available, would be published here. In different but related news, BIEAP has confirmed that AP Inter 1st and 2nd year results would be releasing on April 12, 2019. Latest Board Result Update: AP Inter Result 2019: 1st 2nd year intermediate results releasing today @11 am on bieap.gov.in, rtgs.ap.gov.in

Inter Result 2019 date for Telangana state have not been confirmed yet. Telangana State Board of Intermediate Education, TSBIE has not released any new update on the release date for the TS Inter 1st and 2nd year result 2019. Students and parents are advised to check the official website bie.telangana.gov.in and tsbie.cgg.gov.in for updates on the release date confirmation of TS Inter Results 2019.

Reports of TSBIE releasing the TS Inter Results for Junior and senior intermediate examination on April 10 were released on the internet. Students are however cautioned that the board has not released any notification regarding the same. The last official notification released by the board was on April 4, 2019 when it rubbished the claims of results releasing on April 8.

The board had, in the said notification, warned the students about the fake message that was going around the WhatsApp about the result date. The board had in the notification confirmed that the evaluation and collation work for the result was still under process.

Another news was also released which suggested that the result would be released after the polling in the state, which is on April 11, 2019. Again, it is important to point out here that the board has not released any confirmation regarding the same nor confirmed any date.

The examination for Class 11 and 12 in the state were conducted in the month of February and March, 2019. The results would be released in the month of April. TS Inter Result 2019 would be released on bie.telangana.gov.in, tsbie.cgg.gov.in. Apart from official websites, TSBIE also releases the results on manabadi.co.in, examresults.net and schools9.com.
