12 wine shops face crackdown over poll code violation

State excise dept has asked these outlets to keep their shutters down till May 25 for not sticking to timings



As the state goes into the first phase of 2019 Lok Sabha elections on Thursday, law enforcement agencies across the city are coming down heavily on attempts to use alcohol to influence voters. The state excise department on Tuesday booked 12 wine and liquor shops across the city and district for not following the opening and closing time for their establishments.



All 12 outlets have not only been booked for violation of the model code of conduct, but also booked under Bombay Foreign Liquor Act 1953, Maharashtra Foreign Liquor (Sale on Cash, Register of Sales, etc.) Rules, 1969 and Maharashtra Country Liquor Rules, 1973.



As a punishment all the outlet owners have been asked to keep their shutters down till May 25, the last date for enforcement of the model code of conduct.



The outlets booked include Oriental Wines, Kharadi, JK Liquors, Kharadi, Raj Wines, Hinjawadi, KM Wines, Viman Nagar, Sangram Wines, Hinjawadi, VJ Agarwal, Aundh, Ashoka Country Bar, Hinjawadi, VJ Agarwal, Yerwada, SB Tyagi, Vishrantwadi, AA More, Vishrantwadi, SB Country Wines, Yerwada and Hotel New Parvati in Jejuri.



Superintendent of state excise department, BH Tadwi said, “The action has been taken as per directions of the Pune district collector who has instructed us to act against illegal operation of liquor outlets during the period that the model code of conduct is in place.”



“In Pune, which will go to polls on April 23, the excise department has warned liquor shops against selling it beyond the permitted limit. The department has already issued a circular directing liquor outlets across the district to strictly follow opening and closing time (10 am and 10 pm) of their establishments, and to ensure that all sale of liquor is strictly done under the scanner.”



"Liquor outlets have also been asked to maintain up-to-date brandwise stock registers," he said, adding that any violation of the model code of conduct will be viewed seriously and strict action will be taken.



"There is a high possibility of voters being influenced through the supply of various types of liquor to them. We have data on the average sales of liquor from each shop in the city area. So, if there is any sudden and large increase in these sales, the said shops will be inspected. Details will also be checked about whom the supply is being made to," said Tadwi.


