Varsity asks instt to pay Rs 42 L to families

2016 DROWNING OF 14 STUDENTS FROM ABEDA INAMDAR COLLEGE



Maharashtra Cosmopolitan Education Soc says the direction has no legal binding



After concluding the probe in the drowning of 14 students from Abeda Inamdar Senior College at Murud beach in 2016 — a tragic turn to a picnic — Savitribai Phule Pune University (SPPU) has issued a show-cause notice to the college, asking them to pay Rs 42 lakh to the family of the deceased.



PA Inamdar, the president of Maharashtra Cosmopolitan Education Society (MCES), which runs the college, told Pune Mirror that they have requested the varsity to wait until the Bombay High Court (HC) ruling. They have also argued that the fine has no legal binding. They were responding to a March 5 letter from SPPU, where the management council has decided to levy Rs 3 lakh for each of the deceased students. The money would be handed over to the parents by the varsity. Also, it lists the name of 12 erring staffers, who had to be reprimanded.



As per the officials, the varsity had appointed a fact-finding committee (Misal committee) and the investigative committee (Kharat committee). The third committee headed by management council member Mahesh Abale, finally evaluated the findings and shot the final showcause notice on March 5, to which college replied this Monday.



“Various committee reports pointed out that there were lacunae from the college’s side. The investigative committee has reported that the staffers responsible for the children were around 500 metres to 1 km away from the accident site,” said Mahesh Abale, the chairman of committee setup by management council. He added, “As per University Grants Commission (UGC) norms if more than 50 students are on a trip, they should have had a doctor. There were around 100 children in the group. The college is citing technicalities that the children were in different batches and vehicles. This cannot be an excuse.”



The SPPU officials said that the university had full right to investigate and levy fine based on the Maharashtra Public Universities Act, 2016. It is pertinent to note that the state higher education department had also appointed a committee to probe into the issue.



“As per UGC guidelines, parents should be alerted about the itinerary and travel plans well in advance. Some parents informed that they were told only a day in advance. The court has not specifically barred varsity from taking action, so we did it,” said Prabhakar Desai, director of Board of Students’ Welfare at SPPU.



Meanwhile, the MCES top brass said that there was no sufficient legal binding to order compensation.



“We responded to the show-cause notice three days ago, requesting SPPU to wait. We appeal that a decision is taken based on HC ruling which is awaited. To give legal binding to this action, the university should have made statutes based on the UGC norms,” Inamdar, president of MCES.



He added that civil and criminal allegations dwell on negligence by the staffers. “However, the police report submitted to the court said that there was negligence from the deceased, who overlooked warning from locals. All of the students were adults. So, action should be taken based on rules and not on the pressure of parents,” he said.



Meanwhile, the varsity officials said that the decision was taken based on merit. “Rs 3 lakh cannot replace the loss of life. So, we considered overall merit in the case while taking decisions,” said Desai.


