PCB throws open Castellino Road foot overbridge at last

Authorities were delaying the inauguration citing violation of model code of conduct



In a recent development, the Pune Cantonment Board (PCB) authorities unofficially opened the foot overbridge (FOB) for pedestrians connecting Solapur Bazar to Modikhana area on Castellino Road. The opening was held without much show only with some school students



Around a fortnight back, local residents had demanded PCB to open the bridge as it was kept shut on the name of model code of conduct even after construction was over a month in advance. Residents had also given ultimatum for opening the skywalk by putting several banners around it.



Locals claimed that despite completion of all the work, PCB had not inaugurated the bridge merely because they failed to bring any minister for a formal ceremony and further kept it closed for another two months in the name of enforcement of model code of conduct. They were demanding immediate opening of the bridge for senior citizens and students.



PCB authorities had issued a notice to the locals with a warning of legal action if they conduct inauguration by themselves during the period when the model code of conduct was in operation.



Talking to Mirror, chief executive officer, PCB, DN Yadav, said, “We had not received safety certificate, therefore could not allow anybody to use the FOB. We conducted safety test by allowing students to use this bridge. The FOB is perfectly fine and now people may start using it. The formal inauguration ceremony will be conducted after relaxation of model code of conduct only,” he said.



“Because of absence of safety certificate inauguration by locals was a risky affair,” he added.



The locals were claiming that thousands of pedestrians, mainly students, are crossing the busy Castellino Road, risking their lives every day. Several accidents involving pedestrians had been reported from the stretch in the past.



Talking to Mirror, Akbar Shaikh, a local resident, said, “We are thankful to the cantonment for opening the bridge even after the model code of conduct was in force. Why should people suffer in the name of code of conduct?”



“This stretch sees a three-way traffic flow, making it a very busy road. Citizens should not be made to suffer for another month when the facility is ready.” Shaikh added.


