Qureshi refutes rumours about Israeli pilot in Pakistan's custody

The meeting of Standing Committee on Foreign Affairs, was headed by Senator Mushahid Hussain.

ISLAMABAD (Dunya News) – Pakistan Foreign Minister Shah Mahmood Qureshi said on Thursday that India has been preparing for another military action against Pakistan.

“Pakistan has reliable intelligence that India is devising a new plan. Even America has endorsed Pakistan’s viewpoint over Indian claims of downing a F-16 fighter jet,” he said.

During a meeting of Standing Committee on Foreign Affairs, headed by Senator Mushahid Hussain, Qureshi affirmed that Pakistan needs to stay on high alert till May 23.

He also expressed disappointment at the Indian government’s decision to not issue visas to Pakistani journalists to cover a meeting of the Kartarpur Corridor.

“India cancelled the meeting which was scheduled to be held on April 2 on the Kartarpur Corridor,” he said.

Senator Sherry Rehman expressed her concerns over trapped Pakistanis in jails in UAE. To which, Qureshi replied that the government has been striving to retrieve prisoners who have completed their jail time.

He said 2,107 prisoners from Saudi Arabia will soon return to Pakistan, and in the Islamic month of Ramzan, a good news is expected from the UAE as well.

The committee expressed strong reservations over Prime Minister Imran Khan’s recent remarks regarding the bilateral relations between India and Pakistan, if Narendra Modi secures victory in the Indian general elections.

To which, Qureshi assured members of the committee that he would convey their reservations to the premier.

Regarding the dossier India has handed over to Pakistan, the minister said there was nothing new in it. “Pakistan had downed two Indian fighter jets while India shot down its own helicopter which killed their six people,” he added.

“Pakistan had captured only one Indian pilot, and speculations in the media about capture of an Israeli pilot are fake,” he maintained.
