In bua-bhatija alliance, Akhilesh seems ready to play role of junior partner

The Samajwadi Party (SP) and Bahujan Samaj Party (BSP) announced an alliance in Uttar Pradesh for the 2019 Lok Sabha elections.

The SP-BSP alliance was announced today (January 12). The SP-BSP alliance in UP will give a tough fight to Bharatiya Janata Party (BJP) in Uttar Pradesh. The SP-BSP seat sharing is 38 seats each out of the state's 80 parliamentary constituencies, according to a PTI report.

Now the biggest challenge for Akhilesh Yadav would be to maintain a positive bonding with Mayawati. Indications from him are clear that the former CM is ready to play the role of a junior alliance partner despite a 50-50 pact.

DONNING STYLES

Mayawati, during press conferences and rallies, generally reads from notes she prepares for herself. On the other hand Akhilesh Yadav speaks without the help of notes during his speeches and has been hardly spotted before reading from the notes.

But, in a joint press conference on Saturday (January 12) the SP chief was also reading his speech on the alliance announcement from a piece of paper. This shows that the former CM might not be willing to do anything which could offend her alliance partner.

MAYAWATI STANDS WITH AKHILESH

After the BSP supremo declared that she will be firmly standing with Akhilesh over possibility of a CBI probe against him in connection with illegal mining case in UP, the SP chief went an extra mile to praise her and said, "Respecting Mayawati is same as respecting me."

SEAT SHARING

Akhilesh Yadav had many times said that his party is ready to compromise a few seats in the upcoming Lok Sabha polls for an alliance with the BSP. However, there is now an agreement of contesting from equal seats.

CHANGING CAMPAIGN STYLE

The former CM during his e-chaupal in Kannauj on Friday (January 11) also said that this time he has no time for Rath Yatras during the elections and his focus will be more on conducting rallies.

It is because of the tie up with Mayawati that Akhilesh has decided to change his campaign strategy in order to work in accordance with BSP's style of campaigning, despite the fact that Rath Yatras in the past has increased his popularity and gave him a huge electoral success in 2012 assembly polls.

Both parties' leadership are now working closely to organise joint rallies in BJP's stronghold including PM Modi's constituency Varanasi.

FIGHTING BJP

The former CM's indication of projecting Mayawati as potential prime ministerial candidate for upcoming Lok Sabha polls also makes it clear that the BSP chief clearly holds the edge in this alliance formed with a clear intent of obstructing the BJP from coming back to power in the general elections.

After outflanking the BJP in Gorakhpur and Phoolpur by-polls with the help of BSP, Akhilesh met Mayawati the same day and thanked her for contributing in his party's victory. Since then he had been making attempts to reach out to his old rival for a rapprochement, which has finally given him success.
