Birding team from Coimbatore spots rare species

When the team of four birders Mohammed R Saleem , PA Azeez, Ravi Rishi and Thillai Makadhan went on the Great Indian Bird expedition -SEEK2019, little did they know that they would spot whinchat (Saxicola Rubetra), a bird that has not been documented in the country. The team traversed 22,000 km across the country documenting birds and spreading awareness on the importance of protecting them and their natural habitats. Needless to say, they were thrilled to see a whinchat.“It’s very difficult to spot whinchat as they are very small. They resemble stonechat, another small passerine bird. We saw it perched on a bush surrounded by other birds at the National Chambal Sanctuary, situated at the tripoint of Rajasthan, Madhya Pradesh and Uttar Pradesh. This short-tailed bird is a migratory species breeding in the European region which usually flies down to the middle east and Africa during the migratory season. It’s very rare to spot it in India”, says Saleem, the team leader of the expedition.”They also spotted some other interesting birds like the grey hypocolius (Hypocolius Ampelinus), common ringed plover (Charadrius Hiaticula) in Gujarat, the endangered white winged duck (Asarcornis Scutulata) and the critically endangered bengal florican (Houbaropsis bengalensis) in Assam. “The white winged duck is an extremely shy bird which cannot be spotted in open wetlands. So, we had to venture deep into the forest looking for them. After a long wait, a local forest official went inside and spotted the bird. We followed him. We were very careful not to disturb any species in the area. By the time we managed to click a picture, the bird flew away. Similarly, we were able to spot bengal florican as that was their breeding season. That’s the only time you can see this bird. We wanted to spot the bird in the morning, but we missed it and had to go again in the evening. It remained in the location for few minutes. On most days, we had to skip breakfast and lunch as we had to spot birds inside the forests. We would make it up with a good meal at night. Thankfully, we had stocked up lot of snacks that came in handy during the journey.”Though the 79-day trip was arduous, nothing could deter the team’s spirits. “We started the trek on January 12th and returned to Coimbatore on March end. “One of the biggest challenges was that the migratory season was coming to an end and hence, most of the birds had flown back to their respective regions. In some places, especially in the north east, the roads posed a huge challenge. One day, our vehicle got stuck in sludge. It was raining heavily, the telephone networks were jammed and we couldn’t reach out to anyone for help. We had to wait for someone to come on the way and help us. We couldn’t get down from our vehicle as well as the entire area was sloppy. It was a long wait from evening to next morning. After that, we had to drive on first gear for a long distance. Every week some situation would arise, but thankfully, the forest officials in all these states were extremely helpful.”When quizzed how different states fared in wildlife conservation, he says. “People of Gujarat and Rajasthan are playing a doing well. Here is an example. We were waiting at a spot in Gujarat and there was pin drop silence. We spotted a vehicle arriving toward us but it stopped mid-way. A boisterous babble filled the air and soon a number of birds flew down. That’s when we realized that they had brought food for the birds. The forests in these regions were thriving with birds. On the other hand, the birds in the north east region are dwindling. While there are very few birds in the villages, the protected forest areas host a good number. I think a lot depends on the lifestyle of people. For instance, majority of the people in Gujarat and Rajasthan are vegetarians but those in north east have traditionally been hunters. They do not have many other occupations to take up. But, awareness is spreading among the tribal communities in the northeast and hope the birds flourish here as well.”
