Lok Sabha polls Phase 1 voting: 81 pc turnout in WB, 2 killed in Andhra - 10 points

Voters show their voter ID-cards after casting votes at a polling booth near Noida | Photo Credit: PTI

New Delhi: The polling for Lok Sabha elections 2019 kicked off on Thursday (April 11) as voters turned out in huge numbers to cast their ballot for the first phase of the polls in 91 constituencies in 20 states and Union Territories. The first phase of polls was marred by violence, clashes and technical glitches at a few places, with at least two persons killed in clashes in Andhra Pradesh.

However, the Election Commission of India said that polling was largely peaceful except for a few sporadic incidents of violence. “We thank the voters for coming out to vote in significant numbers. We would also like to thank the state machinery, security forces and nodal officers in various states for their support to ensure smooth polling,” Deputy Election Commissioner Umesh Sinha said.

The first of polling, in which nearly 13.97 crore voters could exercise their franchise, took place in Uttar Pradesh, Andhra Pradesh, Arunachal Pradesh, Assam, Bihar, Chhattisgarh, Jammu and Kashmir, Maharashtra, Manipur, Meghalaya, Mizoram, Nagaland, Odisha, Sikkim, Telangana, Tripura, Uttarakhand, West Bengal, Andaman & Nicobar Islands and Lakshadweep.

Lok Sabha election 2019 phase 1 voting: Key Highlights

An average voter turnout of 63% was recorded in eight Lok Sabha constituencies in Uttar Pradesh, the chief electoral officer said. The highest polling percentage of 70.69% was reported from Saharanpur, while Ghaziabad recorded the lowest with 57.6 per cent. Voting in first phase took place in Saharanpur, Kairana, Muzaffarnagar, Bijnore, Meerut, Baghpat, Ghaziabad and Gautam Buddh Nagar. Polling concluded peacefully in Jammu and Kashmir's Baramulla, where 35.01% of the 13.12 lakh electorate cast their ballots on Thursday. In 2014, the polling percentage for Baramulla Lok Sabha constituency was 39.6 per cent. The total voter turnout in Jammu and Kashmir was nearly 56%, with around 67% voting recorded in Jammu. Odisha recorded 66% voting in Phase 1 of the elections till 6 pm, with polling remaining largely violence-free. However, zero per cent polling was recorded in certain Maoist-hit areas of Malkangiri in the state. Yes, we have received reports of poll boycott by villagers over some issues, while zero polling was recorded in some Maoist-hit areas of Malkangiri district," Chief Electoral Officer (CEO) Surendra Kumar said. Reportedly, at least six booths in Chitrakonda area of Malkangiri recorded "zero polling", news agency PTI quoted an EC official as saying. Meanwhile, voters defied Maoists' call to boycott polls by turning up to vote in the first phase of the general elections in Chhattisgarh. Bastar recorded 57 per cent voting, the EC said. Security had been tightened in the region with around 80,000 state and personnel deployed in the wake of a Naxal attack in Dantewada area on Tuesday, which one BJP leader and four security personnel were killed. Despite the tragedy, slain BJP MLA Bheema Mandvi cast their votes in Dantewada. Voting took place for two seats in West Bengal which saw the maximum voting percentage at 81%. Meanwhile, 73 per cent voting was recorded at Andaman and Nicobar Islands. Bihar recorded the lowest voter turnout in the 18 states and two Union Territories during phase 1 of 2019 polls. The state recorded 50% of polling percentage on Thursday. The average voter turnout in Maharashtra, where polling took place in seven Lok Sabha constituency, was 56 percent. Notably, the highest voter turnout in the state was recorded in the Maoist-affected area of Gadchiroli-Chimur with 62 per cent and the lowest was recorded at 52 per cent in Ramtek. The poll percentage in other constituencies in the state are: Bhandara-Gondiya (61%), Chandrapur (56 %), Wardha (56 %), Nagpur (54%) and Yavatmal-Washim (55%). 66% voter turnout was recorded in Arunachal Pradesh, 67.1% in Meghalaya, 69% in Odisha, 60% in Mizoram, 78% in Nagaland, 78.2 % in Manipur, 81.8% in Tripura and 68% in Assam. In Telangana, the voter per cent was 60% while in Uttarakhand, it was 57.85%. A controversy erupted earlier in the day after a letter, purportedly written by the Congress, claimed that Rahul Gandhi's life was under threat after a green laser was pointed at the Congress chief in Amethi while he was interacting with the media on Wednesday. The green laser was believed to be from a 'sniper gun', alleged a letter which was purportedly signed by Congress leader Ahmed Patel and Randeep Singh Surjewala. However, the Congress later denied that it had written any letter to the MHA, with the ministry also confirming that it had not received any letter from the Congress. The Election Commission of India said that there had been a few incidents where the Electronic Voting Machine (EVM) had been damaged. It said that six incidents were reported from Andhra Pradesh, 5 in Arunachal Pradesh, 1 in Bihar, 2 in Manipur and 1 in West Bengal.

BJP sought to defend 32 seats in the first phase of polling, including those being contested by senior party leader Nitin Gadkari and five other Union Ministers. Meanwhile, the main opposition party Congress aimed at defending seven seats won by it in 2014 Lok Sabha polls.

The second phase of the seven-phase of the 2019 Lok Sabha elections will take place on April 18. The counting of votes will take place on May 23.




