Is Article 370 out and freedom in?

Omkar Dattatray

No, not at all. One of the most controversial issues in India and J&K politics is back to shake the Indian politics and it is controversial article 370 of the Indian constitution. Article 370 of the constitution of India is a temporary provision. By virtue of article 370 Jammu and Kashmir has got a special status and position. But to say that article 370 which has become very controversial is the basis of state’s accession with the Indian union is baseless and incorrect and this bogey is created by Kashmir centric political parties of NC, PDP, Congress and others only to emotionalize the political atmosphere and more so this controversial article 370 is raised at the drop of a hat. Unnecessary hue and cry is being created by the regional political parties for making themselves relevant in J&K politics and also to show their solidarity with the separatists in the state. Much has been said and written about article 370 and now the time has come to put all speculations at rest regarding this article and it is the opportune time to abrogate this article which has in fact become a wall of hatred and distance between India and J&K. This controversial article is the genesis of all separatist problems in the state.

Therefore, for the fuller integration of the J&K state with Indian union, it is mandatory and in the interest of J&K people that this article should be scrapped once for all so that people do not emotionalize it any more. Article 370 is the bridge of difference between J&K and the rest of India and so it is in the fitness of things to do away with this transitory provision of the Indian constitution so that state is fully integrated with the national mainstream. Article 370 is the root cause and an obstacle in the economic and industrial development of J&K and thus if the state of J&K has to make progress and prosperity, it is important to scarp this article so that Indian investors will invest in J&K and set up industries. This will revolutionize the economic and industrial prospects in the state. It will be of great help in the provision of employment if this article which has now become useless is abrogated at the earliest. Now, BJP has kept the abrogation of article 370 and article 35 A in its election manifesto and it is hoped that if BJP comes to power again on its own the party will accelerate the process of the cancellation of this article which has unnecessarily become an issue for the politicians of all parties and gullible people as well who are hoodwinked on this article which has wrongly been made an article of faith in J&K.

If any talk is made to scarp this unnecessary article, the politicians of Kashmir make efforts to raise separatist passions only to gain the sympathy of the gullible voters. Even the secessionist agenda gets impetus by the Kashmir centric political parties of NC and PDP in particular and Congress in general on article 370. Farooq Abdullah-the president of NC and NC’s candidate from Srinagar Lok Sabha constituency has as usual given controversial, uncalled for, unwarranted and seditious statement that if article 370 is abrogated by the BJP government, Kashmir will secede and automatically gets azadi. Farooq Abdullah should desist from giving controversial and anti-national statements to remain relevant in Kashmir politics. One fails to understand is not J&K free and independent state within Indian federation? Or not the people of J&K free to profess and practise the religion of their choice? Do not Kashmiris have financial and decision making autonomy? The answer to these questions is that people of J&K are the masters of their destiny and they chose the government of their choice with adult franchise without fear, favor and intimidation. Thus Kashmir or for that matter J&K people have all freedoms and rights within Indian constitution and under states own constitution. Therefore it is absurd and ridiculous that Farooq Abdullah stokes separatist passions and seditious feelings by his controversial and unwarranted statements which are anti national.

These anti national statements are given by the NC leader for the purpose of winning votes in the Lok Sabha elections. So far so good but he should restrain himself from giving such anti national and controversial statements just for gaining political points in the murkier field of politics. According to Farooq Abdullah article 370 is out and freedom in and Kashmir will automatically get freedom if article 370 is abrogated. This is a fallacious contention and theory as accession with Indian union is irrevocable, absolute and final and it will not be affected by the abrogation of article 370 and article 35 A which have become useless and futile during the last 70 years of freedom and self rule. Even on earlier occasions the same national conference leader Farooq Abdullah is reported to have said that accession with India is irrevocable and final and now what wrong is going on in the mind of Farooq Abdullah. He is famous of giving statements and later retracting from them which has been seen umpteen times in the past. Not only Farooq but the PDP Chief Mehbooba Mufti has warned the centre government not to play with fire by revoking article 370 of the constitution which accords special position to J&K because of its Muslim majority character. She is adept in giving controversial and emotional statements. Mehbooba is blackmailing the centre government by giving controversial and a seditious statements’ to coerce the centre government and emotionalize the political atmosphere in J&K. Article 370 embodies 6 special provisions for J&K. It exempted the state from the complete applicability of the constitution of India and this is ironic and unfortunate.

The state was allowed to have its own constitution and flag. The article 370 could be abrogated or amended only upon the recommendations of the state’s constituent assembly. But constituent assembly had been dissolved and thus there does not arise the need of the prior recommendation at all in abrogation of article 370. The Supreme Court admits plea challenging the validity of article 370 of the constitution of India granting special status to J&K. Thus, it is sub-judice. The Supreme Court should decide it for the good of Indian and for the J&K as well. Article 370 should be abolished as soon as possible. All this is under the purview of Union of India which is applicable to J&K also. Then where is the need of special status weightage by article 370? Article 370 is a temporary provision which grants special autonomous status to J&K under part XXI of the constitution of India which deals with temporary, transitory and special provision. The state of J&K has been accorded special status under this article. The plea is filed challenging the Delhi High court’s order which dismissed such plea earlier.

The J&K High court had in 2015 observed that the article 370 is the permanent feature of the constitution and is beyond amendment, repeal or abrogation. Even as the Supreme Court ordered notice to central government – the BJP’s chief spokesperson Sunil Sethi told press reporters that BJP at that time had no inclination to abrogate article 370 as long as common minimum program of the agenda of the alliance is followed. Anyway article 370 should be repealed for the interest of India and the state of J&K. The article is a wall of hatred between India and J&K and it should be scrapped to pave way for fuller integration of J&K with Union of India.

Instrument of accession is the basis of J&K’s accession with India and not controversial article 370 in any manner. Those who say that this controversial article is the basis of accession are wrong and those who dare centre government to repeal article 370 are living in a fool’s paradise because sooner or later article 370 will have to be scrapped. In nut shell, J&K will remain part of India with article 370 or without it and politicians particularly Kashmir centric should desist from stoking separatist passions and fire by their uncalled for statements on the controversial article and instead pay their attention towards the pressing needs of the people which matters the most.
