PWG Hosts Alyssa Ayres for Mentoring Breakfast

PWG Hosts Alyssa Ayres for Mentoring Breakfast

The Pardee Women’s Group (PWG) hosted Alyssa Ayres, Senior Fellow at the Council on Foreign Relations, for a mentoring breakfast with students on April 10, 2019 at the Frederick S. Pardee School of Global Studies at Boston University.

During the talk Ayres described her path to the Council on Foreign Relations, and the importance of network connections. In addition, she depicted the struggles of being a woman in IR policy, especially in IR scholarship. Students were able to ask Ayres questions about post-graduate life, where she was able to offer both tips and advice.

Ayres is a senior fellow for India, Pakistan, and South Asia at the Council on Foreign Relations. She came to the Council on Foreign Relations after serving as deputy assistant secretary of state for South Asia under the Obama administration. She recently published her book; Our Time has Come: How India is Making Its Place in the World.

The Pardee Women’s Group was created to help build and foster relationships between the Pardee School’s female students (inclusive to non-binary students as well as “male allies”), faculty, and greater community through networking events, speaker series, and a variety of community-building activities. The goal of the Pardee Women’s Group is to both empower and educate women and to encourage equal classroom participation.

The Pardee Women’s Group welcomes both undergraduate and graduate Pardee School students, but will focus on topics such as gender-based discrimination in the classroom and work force, and will serve as a resource for students struggling with work-life balance and deciding what to do after leaving the Pardee School. Additionally, the Pardee Women’s Group promises to be a champion for socioeconomic inclusion and encourages all types of classroom diversity.

For information about upcoming events or for general inquires visit the Pardee Women’s Group Facebook page or email PardeeWG.BU@gmail.com.

View all posts
