Dharavi redevelopment: Dharavi residents say they have lost faith in political parties, may go NOTA

Dharavi redevelopment

Mumbai South Central

Shiv Sena

Rahul Shewale

Eknath Gaikwad

Lok Sabha

has become a major issue in the campaign forconstituency wheresitting MPis contesting against Congress leader. Pending for over 15 years, the redevelopment project has irked the voters so much that they either might not vote or could go NOTA on theirelection date. Having lost faith in major political parties, residents are pushing for self-redevelopment by forming 12 societies of 1,056 houses. They say they will vote for an independent candidate who will help them in this endeavour.Spread over 210 hectare in the middle of the city connecting western, central and harbour railway lines, Dharavi has consistently been known as one of the biggest slums in Asia. Both Congress-NCP and Shiv Sena-BJP governments failed to redevelop it. The BJP-Sena government floated tenders for the project last year but the matter got stuck in court.Ahead of this year’s polls, residents are questioning every party about past promises. “Dharavi redevelopment has become a joke. All the parties make promises before the polls but nothing happens after that. Many governments have come and gone. None of them could redevelop or had a vision to change Dharavi. We have finally formed societies and are pushing for self-redevelopment. How long are we going to stay in these small houses, without proper roads, toilets and access to public transport? We will prefer voting for an independent candidate who can help us in this,” said Anil Kasare of Jankalyan Gruhnirman Vikas Samitee from the ONGC side of Dharavi.“We have been misguided for so many years. First, the government said we will be given 350-sq ft rooms. It was then increased to 400 sq ft and then 500 sq ft. But the plans never moved an inch in reality. They have always remained on paper. We residents will have to fight for our own redevelopment. The politicians can’t do anything. We are soon holding a meeting of our members to decide whom to vote for this time,” said P Mahalingam from Rajiv Gandhi Cooperative Housing Federation, 90 ft road, Dharavi.Raju Korde, who leads the Dharavi Bachao movement, told Mirror that the Congress government had first issued GR for redevelopment in 2004. He said a similar announcement was made by the BJP government but nothing happened. “There is so much unrest, as 80 per cent households do not have proper electricity connections or toilets. The locals are willing to cooperate but the government refuses to take them into confidence in issues like rehabilitation and provision of facilities,” said Korde.When contacted, Congress candidate and former MP of the area Eknath Gaikwad said that redevelopment is his priority. “There are many issues. During our government, we had finalised the plan. But the BJP-Sena opposition then was adamant on giving 400-sq ft houses instead of standard 325 sq ft. They did not allow the redevelopment. When they came to the power, they could not do it due to lack of vision. Now we will come back to the power and make the project a reality,” Gaikwad said.Shiv Sena MP Rahul Shewale was not available for comment. Sena spokesperson Manisha Kayande said that the rehabilitation of the locals and their businesses would be one of their top priorities. “There is no question of ignoring or delaying it further. We have already started the process. I fought to save Mahim Nature Park, which is one of the biggest green lungs of Dharavi. We will keep the promise given to the people,” Kayande said.
