Activists want KR Market to become a template for redevelopment of other heritage structures

Before malls and packaged food came into being, marketplaces were synonymous with noise, overcrowding, congestion and filth.They still are. Ask wellknown architect K Jaisim his favourite space in Bengaluru, and he will point to the Krishna Rajendra Market and adjoining Avenue Road, nerve centres of traditional businesses that most upmarket Bengalureans would rather avoid.“I am fascinated by the place because that is how a market should be…a meeting place, a congress place, not some supermarket. Because that is where culture and ethos are,” said Jaisim.Maybe a little cleanliness would be better, he said. “…so that the cow, instead of eating plastic, eats the dumped vegetables... Improving the market will improve its visibility.”That’s precisely what is on the cards. An elaborate plan under the Smart City Project is in the works to revamp the iconic Krishna Rajendra Market, the city’s largest wholesale market.An artist’s impression of how this heritage space could look after the revamp presents an almost surreal image of uncluttered, organised and an aesthetically pleasing marketplace.A key part of the plan is to not demolish the old market building. Considering how heritage structures in the city are being brought down with a vengeance, this comes as a relief. From wanting to convert the space into a tintedglass-fronted, multi-storeyed, mall-like structure, the BBMP has come a long way.“The KR Market is a historical building, which dates back to more than 100 years and the pete area is about 400 years old. It’s also one of the first public buildings to have got an electric connection,” architect Naresh Narasimhan said, highlighting KR Market’s place in the city’s history.The city corporation also wanted other heritage markets such as Russel Market and Johnson Market to make way for more modern structures. The logic applied to KR Market will now prevail in those cases, heritage activists hope. Their petition to save the Janatha Bazaar from becoming a mall resulted in the high court staying this historic structure’s demolition.BBMP commissioner N Manjunath Prasad agreed and said Russell Market would be redeveloped on the same lines (as KR Market). “The idea is to ensure that the heritage structures are not dismantled and the original structure is retained. At the same time, we should try to add additional things without touching the original structure,” he said.PROJECT DETAILSFor the main KR Market, kiosks and shop structures are being proposed. The existing meat market and post office buildings are to be demolished and new buildings built in their place. A pedestrian walkway is to connect the Chickpete Metro station, meat market and the bus terminus. Other additions are a loadingunloading bay for goods trucks,vending plazas, internal pathways and a pedestrian ramp.Heritage restoration of three buildings involve minor repairs and restoration of the original finishes, including lime plaster treatment, mouldings and flooring. The plan also involves a revamp of the utilities, including water supply and drainage network, setting up a rainwater harvesting system and a fire protection system. Exterior illumination is to be used to highlight the beauty of the heritage architecture.GP Suresh, chief engineer in charge of the Smart City Project, said it could take about a couple of more months for the tenders to be called for, after which the project could be completed in two years. In that phase, vendors are to be provided an alternative space.GOOD PROPOSAL IF DONE RIGHT, SAY HERITAGE ACTIVISTSPriya Chetty-Rajagopal, founder of Heritage Beku, a citizen group comprising architects and historians, supported the plan with a rider. “The interiors could spiral into an incongruous unaesthetic modern stamp if not integrated into the design and spatial style of the heritage facade. I hope that is taken into consideration,” she said.She pointed out that several heritage buildings in the city need urgent attention and that they should be repurposed without taking away the heritage value. The best example, she said, is the iconic Opera House in Brigade Road that now hosts Samsung ’s biggest experience store without destroying the original facade of the structure.Similar efforts are being made to convert heritage homes and colonial bungalows into commercial centres in the city, like the The Rain Tree on Sankey road, Hatworks Boulevard on Cunningham Road and Cinnamon in Ulsoor to name a few.Curator of the Facebook page ‘Bengaluru bygone age’ CN Kumar stressed on retaining the originality of KR Market. Citing the example of Ashoka Pillar in Jayanagar, he said while the original structure has been retained, the surroundings have been spoilt. “Emphasis should be only on improving the internal functioning of a market,” he said. He said the use of conservation masons and architects to restore parts of the building, as outlined in the plan, was a good thing.Kumar is in favour of replicating the plan to preserve other heritage structures, including Janatha Bazaar. Lamenting the demolition of one such heritage building, he said, “There used to be a government press at the multi-storied building in Vidhana Soudha, which was broken down and now there is no trace of it.”ONE PLAN WILL NOT FIT ALLIndian National Trust for Art and Cultural Heritage (INTACH), Bangalore chapter, recently got a stay order on the proposed plan to demolish Janatha Bazaar. Its convener Meera Iyer says it is imperative that the city has a master plan that considers spaces like KR Market, Russel Market, Janatha Bazaar and others as heritage structures. On the changes to KR Market, she said: “If indeed they are going to retain that façade, that’s a good thing. It’s true the market needed some work quite desperately. So it is a good idea.”Iyer, however warned that the same model cannot be used for other markets as each one has different characteristics and requirements. “Other markets don’t really need a lot of work. They have other problems like parking and empty stores. You can’t use the plan for the KR market as a cookie-cutter and implement it for others,” she said.‘ACCOMMODATE ALL VENDORS’Citizen-activist Vinay Sreenivasa said as the BBMP had only carried out a partial survey of street vendors, there is fear that not all vendors and traders will be allowed to sell at the market after its redevelopment. “The vendors are not from Bengaluru alone. There are farmers who come from different parts of Karnataka. The BBMP has to talk to all stakeholders, including street vendors, before initiating the redevelopment plan.” he said.Sreenivasa stressed on retaining it as a “poor people’s market,” saying the project should not result in the market taking the shape of a mall. “Make it appear more like a santhe (fair), keeping its original character and don’t alter it to the extent that it becomes like a mall. The market reflects the spirit of Kempe Gowda’s Bengaluru,” he said.NO PUBLIC CONSULTATIONArchitect Narasimhan pointed out that no public consultation was held before approving such an important project. Meera Iyer said the plan could still be run past people working in the field of restoration. “I’m not saying it is a requirement, but it would have been nice,” she said. Narasimhan himself had prepared a detailed proposal to redevelop the market in 2013, but that remained a non-starter. Places adjoining the market should also be improved, he said.
