Piyush Goyal: Voters will do a surgical strike on DMK-Cong combine in TN

People will do a ‘surgical strike’ on the DMK and the Congress because they are the fountain-head of corruption in this country, said Union Minister Piyush Goyal, who is BJP’s election incharge for Tamil Nadu, while reacting to Congress President Rahul Gandhi’s corruption charges on the BJP at a rally in Krishnagiri.

Gandhi should first answer as to why his family and his party had allowed poverty in India for so many years while they were in power. “Three generations of Gandhi family rule had cheated the poor of India. Now, the poor of India don’t trust the Gandhi family, the Congress or the DMK because they make only false promises,” Goyal told newspersons here.

Various corruption cases, including Coalgate, Aircel-Maxis; 2G and telecom (BSNL-Maran case), happened during the Congress rule in which the DMK was an alliance partner. “The nation wants to know whether they are going to do only corruption or will they ever think for the poor of India. Nobody believes their false promises,” he said.

NDA in Tamil Nadu

“I am confident that people here want Modi to once again become Prime Minister and serve the people of India,” Goyal said.

In the 2014 Lok Sabha elections, all the 40 seats, including the lone Puducherry seat, were won by current NDA alliance partners — the AIADMK (37); the PMK (one); the BJP (one) and the NR Congress in Puducherry. This time, “we have formed the biggest alliance that Tamil Nadu has ever seen. We are confident that people here will support this alliance, which stands for strong, stable, decisive, honest and visionary leader Narendra Modi. This alliance is working to strengthen Modi’s government and to ensure that the next government will have a big voice, and people of Tamil Nadu will have a big representation,” he said. The BJP is committed to setting up an authority to speed up the implementation of the interlinking of rivers. The Congress and the DMK in the last ten years did nothing for interlinking of rivers. However, from 2014, the Modi Government has continuously worked on this. For example, the Godavari-Cauvery link has tremendous potential and can help all southern States, with Tamil Nadu being one of the biggest beneficiaries.

Both the Centre and the State government are working to set up a series of solar-powered desalination plants to provide immediate relief to the people of Tamil Nadu especially in the coastal areas by providing drinking water.

The Kusum Yojna will be a game changer for farmers who will be encouraged to set up solar power generation in a part of their fields. The solar power will be used to power pumps and the balance power will be fed to the Tamil Nadu power grid so that farmers’ income can increase significantly by the use of land for solar power apart from increasing the crop yield, he said.
