BS Yeddyurappa’s former PA alleges threat to life from politician's current assistant

BS Yeddyurappa’s former PA alleges threat to life from politician's current assistant

Earlier in 2017 too, NS Vinay had alleged that Santosh had issued threats to him and his family.

news Crime

In an embarrassment to Karnataka BJP, NS Vinay, former personal assistant (PA) of state president BS Yeddyurappa has once again alleged threat to him and his family from his current PA, NR Santosh.

On Friday, Vinay sought police protection for himself and his family and submitted a petition to Amruthahalli Police. In his statement to the police, he said that he was being followed by suspicious persons.

Vinay said he was under threat as he has incriminating evidence— a pen drive, CD and a diary that can impact the reputation of former CM Yeddyurappa.

Officials at Amruthahalli police station asked him to approach Bengaluru City Police Commissioner as they do not have the authority to give protection. Meanwhile, police have registered a non-cognisable report.

Speaking to TNM, Vinay said, “I will go meet the Police Commissioner on Monday and seek police protection from him. I will also submit all the documents and other evidence to the police or the court as suggested by police.”

He however, refused to reveal what the documents contain.

Earlier in 2017 too, Vinay had alleged that Santosh had issued threats to him and his family.

On May 11, 2017 an abduction attempt was reportedly made on Vinay by a few men near Bengaluru’s ISKCON temple in Mahalakshmi Layout police station limits.

Following a complaint filed by Vinay to the Mahalakshmi Layout police, 11 people including Rajendra Urs, the general secretary of BJP Yuva Morcha city unit and history sheeter Prashant, were arrested by the police.

All of them had named Santosh as the mastermind of the attempted abduction. Santosh was questioned by the ACP of Malleswaram Sub Division, Anand Badiger who is heading the investigations in this case.

Even BS Yeddyurappa was summoned by police for questioning in connection with the case.

Currently, Santosh has got a stay from the Karnataka High Court after he moved the court objecting to a probe by the Central Crime Branch.

Incidentally, at that time Vinay was PA to KS Eshwarappa, the former protege-turned-foe of Yeddyurappa within the party. The friction between the two led to Eshwarappa forming a separate faction. The feud between the two ended after the intervention of the BJP High Command.
