BJP Manifesto: A 'Sankalp' for development

Bharatiya Janata Party's 'sankalp patra' or vision document, as the party likes to call it, for the 2019 elections can be viewed as a continuation of schemes and projects the party had focussed on in its 2014 vision document. Nationalism, national security, anti-terror measures, doubling farm income, a greater infrastructure push and policies oriented to make India the world's third largest economy feature on top of the ruling party's list of priorities.

To distinguish this time's vision document from the previous one, BJP has underlined that its thrust will be on - '75 milestones for India @ 75'. Prime Minister Narendra Modi said that these are the targets India should achieve to honour the freedom fighters when the country celebrates its 75th year of independence in 2022. Modi said that the citizens should be given a record of their governance. The completion of these 75 milestones would be a fitting account of his party's governance.

The 75 milestones enlisted, though, are not ideas that have been conceived afresh. Many are a continuation of ongoing government projects. For instance, generating 175 gigawatts of renewable energy is one of the key targets under India's nationally determined contributions submitted to the UN while signing the Paris climate pact. Similarly, the party has also included cleaning up Ganga by 2022 as one of the targets.

Also Read: Getting the party started

In comparison to the 2014 vision document, the recent one also does not make any mention of some of the promises such as building 100 new cities enabled with Wi-Fi. The document is quiet on what has happened with regards to task force on black money and positive impacts of demonetisation.

The BJP had launched a multi-pronged outreach programme to gather inputs for the manifesto. Dubbed as 'Bharat ke Mann ki Baat', the party launched a website and also a toll-free number. It also flagged-off 300 raths to cover 4,000 assembly constituencies and besides this, 7,700 suggestion boxes were also provided to the public to gather their suggestions. There was also a separate outreach that was derived through the BJP Mahila Morcha under the Bharat ke Mann ki Baat programme.

Also Read: Getting the party started

RJD manifesto promises reservation in government jobs

TMC manifesto targets Modi govt

NCP manifesto promises to scrap Triple Talaq Bill

Congress Manifesto: Jobs and women security on agenda
