Polls will be fight between 'anyay' and NYAY: Rahul Gandhi

The Congress on Saturday alleged that loans of corporates have been written off "on a large scale" by the Narendra Modi government. Congress spokesperson Abhishek Manu Singhvi, while talking to reporters in Delhi, said, "In the last one decade, banks have written off Rs 7 lakh crore loans. Of this, Rs 5.5 lakh crore loans to corporates have been written off in the last five years by the Modi government."

"Of the Rs 5.5 lakh crore, as much as Rs 1.56 lakh crore loans have been written off in the last one year alone," Singhvi claimed. "On average, this government has merrily written off loans worth Rs 1 lakh crore every year," Singhvi added.

Also on Saturday, Congress president Rahul Gandhi hit out at PM Narendra Modi, saying the Lok Sabha polls will be a fight between Anil Ambani and ordinary people, and thieves and honest people.

"This election is between Anil Ambani and the common citizens, five years of 'anyay' (injustice) and NYAY (justice/minimum income scheme), thieves and honest people, and false promises and truth," Gandhi said. He said the election is also a fight between ideologies, where there is "hatred, anger and divisive politics on one hand", and "love, affection and brotherhood" on the other.

The fight is also about Modi's "lie" of depositing Rs 15 lakh into everyone's accounts and Rs 3.6 lakh into those of women living below the poverty line as promised by Congress.

Mocking the 'Chowkidar' description of himself by the Prime Minister in his fight against corruption, Rahul sought to know whom the watchman guarded. "Have you ever seen a Chowkidar outside the house of a farmer, labourer and unemployed? Chowkidar is found outside the house of Anil Ambani. This Chowkidar guarded 15 to 20 rich people," he said.

He accused the Prime Minister of "jailing farmers" and not Anil Ambani for allegedly defaulting on loans.

Rahul was addressing a rally at KR Nagar, where he asked Congress and JD(S) workers to cooperate with each other and ensure the alliance's victory. His appeal comes amid squabblings between Congress and JD(S) workers at the grassroot level in several constituencies.
