It’s the final countdown...

vinaymishra188@gmail.com

Mona

The wait that seemed like forever is finally over and the fans of Game of Thrones the world over are tripping over to get set for the final season of this epic fantasy. With hearts in their mouth to know the fate of their favourites, the GOT watchers have taken over everything, right from office cafeterias to Instagram to whatsapp groups to discuss varied theories on how this gruesome tale of epic proportion finally comes to an end.

While speculations are rife as who would last for how long in the new season, the secrecy of the script has been kept so tight that reportedly, a la Mission Impossible style, the digital scripts with the cast would self destruct post the shoot. The most pirated show of the world would simulcast in India along with the US and fans are prepared to pull an early morning as it would stream on Hotstar at 6.30 on Monday morning.

While six episodes to tie all the loose ends seem too less, the general belief is that it’s going be fiercer, bloodier, springing up surprises. And the fans are ready. Actor Nakuul Mehta took on the mantle of Jon Snow, one of the most loved characters of the show, in an Instagram post that read, “Let the 'games' begin one last time. Who else is flipping out for the last ever season of GOT?"

Param Kalra, just back from Jordon, is in a huge hurry to beat the jetlag. His Sunday plan is to hit the bed at six in the evening. “There is no way I am missing the starting of Season 8,” he beams. So huge is GOT8 fever that Monday morning he is all set to clutch his House of Lannister T-shirt and watch it on mobile. He explains about the mobile, “I would be at my parents’ home Monday morning and will watch the show on my mobile. This is a little sacrifice that a GOT fan can make to keep up with the world.” The founder of Start Hub Nation he started the trend of GOT meet-ups in his co-working space wherein the watchers bonded over snacks, drinks and trivia.

Smriti and Rohit Syal, a couple as much in love with each other as GOT, have jogged their memory by binge watching all the seven seasons and all set to welcome Season 8. Earlier, friends would gather at their place to watch it on big screen. This time around, her corporate career and his start-up are keeping them away from hosting a fancy watch party. But together, surrounded by their GOT memorabilia that includes numerous T-shirts, action figures, socks and a prized watch, they are giving in to the thrill of knowing who gets the throne while keeping their fingers crossed that their favourites – Tyrion, Jon, Snow, Daenerys – don’t die.

For Nimisha Malhotra, it’s the Monday night and not the morning. An IT professional, she has vowed to keep away from the social media all through Monday not to get her excitement killed by other’s opinions about the fresh season. “How can one watch it early in the morning and then work through the day? I would save it for the night and sit together with my favourites – my flatmate Shruti, who is as huge a fan of Jon Snow, as I too root for him and our dog whom we call Snowdon.”
