Nuclear-Climate News – week to 14 April

Nuclear-Climate News – week to 14 April

On the surface, not much seems to be happening in nuclear news. Tensions between Pakistan and India have pulled back from the brink. USA and North Korea remain at a nuclear stalemate, while South Korea tries for moderate progress. The mainstream media continues to regurgitate nuclear lobby propaganda about solving climate change, especially by developing small nuclear reactors.

The optimistic picture that’s often given of Chernobyl’s supposed recovery from the 1986 nuclear catastrophe has been thoroughly contradicted, as three new books reveal. Manual for Survival: A Chernobyl Guide to the Future by Kate Brown– details the dedicated research done in Belarus and Ukraine, on radiation effects, and draws attention to the pervasive and growing effects of ionising radiation, globally. Midnight in Chernobyl: The Untold Story of the World’s Greatest Nuclear Disaster – by Adam Higginbotham describes the course of the disaster and investigates the propaganda, secrecy, and myths that have obscured the truth on its effects. Chernobyl: The History of a Nuclear Catastrophe – by Serhii Plokhy dramatically reconstructs the meltdown, and condemns the USSR ’s bureaucratic dysfunction, censorship, secrecy and mismanagement that preceded the disaster, and hindered the Soviet’s response to it. https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=SRu-Xs4U2r4All point to the danger of ionising radiation to the world, as nuclear activities continue, and the radioactive wastes accumulate.

Once again the twin threats of climate change and ionising radiation come together. As glaciers melt, ionising radiation, (from nuclear bomb testing) is released from ice surface sediments. Good news : how we could get (almost) all our energy from the sun by 2050.

The Threat of Nuclear War Is Still With Us,

Police drag Julian Assange from Embassy. –Extradition of Julian Assange must be opposed. USA govt wants to silence all reports of govt atrocities. Wikileaks has won many awards for fine journalism. What Does Julian Assange’s Arrest Mean for Journalists?

EUROPE. Youth climate change protests across Europe.

JAPAN.

PAKISTAN. PAKISTAN’S Prime Minister Imran Khan issues warning on conflict with India, the nuclear danger. https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=cFU_ez_naak&t=9s

USA.

CANADA. SNC-Lavalin nuclear contracts at risk if it’s convicted.

CHINA. China opens fourth border crossing with North Korea, complete with radiation detectors.

FRANCE, The Flamanville EPR risks a new delay , catastrophic for EDF.

FINLAND. Finland’s Olkiluoto 3 nuclear reactor – another delay after delays.

AUSTRALIA Prime Minister Scott Morrison says “no special help” Opposition leader Bill Shorten pleads ignorance of the matter. ‘He uncovered war crimes’: Greens leader urges government to protect Julian Assange, an Australian citizen.
