JK an integral part of India, won’t allow separate PM for JK: PM

NL Correspondent

Kathua, Apr 14

Prime Minister Narendra Modi on Sunday said that Jammu and Kashmir was an integral part of India and declared that no one would be allowed to demand for a separate prime minister for the state.

Addressing an election rally at Kathua in Jammu province the Prime Minister said, “Pakistan was also saying that we have nuclear weapons. But everyone knows what we did. We will never allow those people to succeed who want a separate prime minister for the state. Jammu and Kashmir is an integral part of India.”

Former chief minister of Jammu and Kashmir Omar Abdullah had said that if his party comes back to power they will strive to restore the pre-1953 positions of Sadr-e-Riyasat (governor) and prime minister in the state.

“I will never allow ‘Do Nishan, Do Vidhan and Do Pradhan’ (Two constitutions, two flags and Two sovereign heads) to rule in our land. Ours motive is that of Syama Prasad Mukherjee,” PM Modi said.

He said that Bharatiya Janata Party’s (BJP) commitment and ‘Desh Ka Chowkidar’ (referring to himself) carried the same emotions as Syama Prasad Mukherjee.

Lashing out at the two main regional parties, National Conference (NC) and Peoples Democratic Party (PDP), he said that three generations of the state have been destroyed by their “dynastic” rule.

“Three generations of the state got destroyed by Abdullahs and Muftis. But I am standing like a wall in front of them. This Chowkidar is here to throw them out of power,” the PM said.

He said that even if all the relatives of both the parties come to help them in this election the people will still vote against them.

Criticizing the Indian National Congress (INC), PM Modi said they won’t succeed in ‘disintegrating’ the ‘motherland’ (India). He said that Congress is doing everything to come back to power.

“They (Congress) want to do away with the AFSPA but the BJP will never allow them to do so,” Modi said.

He said that the armed forces and security agencies operating in the state need the protection of the AFSPA.

The Prime Minister also held Congress responsible for the migration of Kashmiri Pandits.

“It was because of Congress flawed policies that Kashmiri Pandits had to flee from the state,” PM said. (KNS)
