PM Narendra Modi says NC & PDP ‘dynastic rule’ has destroyed J&K

KATHUA: Prime Minister Narendra Modi claimed here on Sunday that three generations in Jammu and Kashmir had been destroyed by the “dynastic” rule of National Conference (NC) and People’s Democratic Party (PDP). His statement drew a sharp response from PDP chief Mehbooba Mufti who asked why then did he ally with these very parties.“Three generations of the state got destroyed by the Abdullahs and Muftis. But I am standing like a wall in front of them... This chowkidar is here to throw them out of power,” Modi said at a rally here, some 80 km from Jammu city, in support of BJP candidate from Doda-Udhampur Lok Sabha constituency Dr Jitendra Singh, who is also a junior minister in the PMO.“The PDP, NC and Congress ‘mahamilawat’ has been exposed in the state and the agenda for which they were earlier working undercover is no more hidden,” the PM said.PDP chief Mehbooba Mufti hit back on Twitter. “Why does PM bash political families pre-elections & then sends his envoys to stitch alliances with the very same parties? NC in 99 & PDP in 2015. Why do they choose power over Article 370 then? BJP with its noxious agenda of banishing Muslims & minorities wants to divide India (sic),” she tweeted.Describing NC, PDP and Congress as “mahamilavat”, or grand adulteration, Modi asked voters to end decades of dynastic rule by these political parties in Jammu and Kashmir.Referring to former CM and NC leader Omar Abdullah’s recent statement about restoring the pre-1953 position of the state, with a “Sadr-e-Riyasat (head of state or president)” and “Wazir-e-Riyasat (prime minister)”, Modi said, “Some are threatening two prime ministers, some are speaking the language of anti-nationals, but I want to make it clear to them that Jammu and Kashmir is an integral part of India.”“We will never allow those people to succeed who want a separate prime minister for the state,” he said.Lauding the people for coming out to vote in the first phase of the LS elections on April 11, he said, “You have proved the power of Indian democracy... With heavy voting in Jammu and Baramulla, you have given a strong response to terrorists and opportunists.”Remembering Dr Bhimrao Ambedkar on his birth anniversary, Mr Modi added that Dr Ambedkar had said in a rally in Punjab way back that “vanshwaad (dynastic rule)” weakens a nation, adding, “I want to make it clear to Congress and other vanshwaadi (dynastic rulers), including NC and PDP, that I … will not allow them to be dictatorial in the state.”“I want to tell these Muftis and Abdullahs that this is Modi, who neither kneels down nor is scared of anybody,” the PM said.“How shameful that Congress is now seeking votes on removing the Army from J&K by revoking the Armed Forces (Special Powers) Act,” Modi said. “Congress can never be trusted. After ruling for decades, they are sacrificing our forces and give them no importance,” he said, adding that it was only because of Congress’s wrong policies that Kashmiri Pandits had to leave their homes.Raising the refugee issue, he said, “We will try to settle refugees and also consider their citizenship rights.”Highlighting his government’s achievements, he said, “Your one vote got reservation for border residents, 10% reservation for poor people, benefits for farmers, LPG, power connections, Rs 5 lakh free health insurance for the needy, the opening of Shahpur Kandi Dam, AIIMS, GMCs and engineering colleges.”Modi also criticised Punjab CM Amarinder Singh for missing an event organised to mark the centenary of the Jallianwala Bagh massacre. “While the vice-president, who is not a part of politics, went for a programme organised in Amritsar to pay tribute to the martyrs... the chief minister (of Punjab) was missing,” said Modi.He appealed to voters to vote on April 18 in favour of the BJP candidate, adding, “Your one vote will also give sleepless nights to people across the border and it will further strengthen the chowkidar.”
