Vidisha Lok Sabha constituency likely to host Modi

Vidisha is going to LS polls on May 12. The constituency is one of five seats in MP where BJP is yet to declare its candidates.

Bhopal: Vidisha Lok Sabha constituency in Madhya Pradesh (MP) has a unique identity of electing only a VVIP in its electoral history.

The BJP stronghold flaunts its record of electing tall saffron figures such as former Prime Minister late Atal Behari Vajapyee, external affairs minister Sushma Swaraj and former chief minister Shivraj Singh Chouhan in the past and is now clamouring for Prime Minister Narendra to contest from the seat in the ensuing LS elections.

BJP circle in Madhya Pradesh is currently abuzz with talks that the constituency may host a VVIP in this poll too and the possibility of Mr Modi choosing it as his second seat after Varanasi cannot be ruled out. The delay in declaring candidate for Vidisha by BJP has lent credence to the speculation.

“All kinds of speculations are doing rounds on the Vidisha candidate for BJP. It is true that there are whisperings in the party on nomination of PM for the seat. Although, I cannot rule out any of the talks, I can also term such a speculation as wild at the stage”, a BJP spokesman said.

The constituency has remained loyal to the BJP, barring in 1980 and 1984 Lok Sabha elections when Congress veteran Pratap Bhanu Sharma wrested the seat from BJP, since its constitution in 1967.

Former PM late Vajpayee was elected from the constituency in 1991.

Former chief minister Shivraj Singh Chouhan represented the constituency five times in a row since 1991 and external affairs minister Swaraj has been winning from the constituency in the last two Lok Sabha polls.

“Mr Chouhan has been offered to contest either from Bhopal or Vidisha in the ensuing LS polls. But, he was not willing to shift to Centre by contesting the parliamentary elections. The dilemma over selection of candidate for the seat by the party has given birth to speculation that the party may consider to field the PM in the constituency”, the BJP spokesman said.

Vidisha is going to LS polls on May 12. The constituency is one of five seats in MP where BJP is yet to declare its candidates.

Keep yourself updated on Lok Sabha Elections 2019 with our round-the-clock coverage -- breaking news, updates, analyses etc all. Happy reading.
