Collector's office to hit Mumbai airports urging citizens to cast vote

For the first time, the suburban collector's office, which also is the election office for the Mumbai suburbs, has decided to target the domestic and international airport to urge voters to exercise their ballot. Apart from the airports, the team also plans to cover railway stations, and bus depots in order to bring about awareness of elections and urge people to vote on April 29. Officials fear that people might take leave and go holidaying as the voting day falls in the middle of a long weekend.

The Mumbai suburban collectorate has four constituencies under it — Mumbai North-West, Mumbai North-Central, Mumbai North and Mumbai North-East. Sonali Mule, deputy collector and nodal officer for Systematic Voters' Education and Electoral Participation (SVEEP) for Mumbai Suburban confirmed the details.

Mule said that they are targeting the airports as the idea is to increase voter turnout. "It's vacation period. The voting day falls between the fourth Saturday, Sunday, and May 1 (Maharashtra Day). There is fear that many people may go out on a vacation," said an official from the election office.

Mule, said that the collector has already spoken to various authorities including the BEST to let disseminate information on voting days on BEST buses. The authorities have asked Central Railways and Western Railways to make regular announcements regarding election phases and the dates.

"The information regarding election date will be displayed on the 188 flight schedule display boards at the international airport, urging people to vote. A private airline has already started in-flight announcements. We have received very good response from the authorities for the awareness programme," said Mule.

The election office has asked the deputy registrar's to send out a pledge to housing societies to encourage voting at housing societies. They have roped in Aanganwadi workers and even the community health workers to propagate the message across slums, chawls, and highrises.

EVERY VOTE COUNTS

Information regarding election date (April 29) will be displayed on the 188 flight schedule display boards at the international airport in order to urge people to exercise their ballot
