Mumbai Traffic police: Mumbai police issue warning after drivers steal wheel clamps

Traffic cops

Krishna

Indian Penal Code

While police are already concerned about the menace of abandoned and wrongly parked cars on Mumbai’s streets, they now have an additional issue to worry about: motorists making off with clamped wheels to avoid paying fine.In the past two weeks, two cases of theft have been registered in Malad police station against motorists who drove away after replacing the clamped wheels with spare tyres.There has been a sharp increase in the number of vehicles getting clamped ever since police started rigorously applying Section 201 of the Motor Vehicles Act, which states that owners must pay Rs 50 per hour for abandoning vehicles.According to the police, the first incident took place in the last week of March.on duty spotted three cars – two in a no-parking zone and one in front of a shop, creating a traffic hurdle. They clamped the wheels of all three vehicles, left notices and moved on. Returning to the spot after about three hours, they saw one of the vehicles, a Honda City, was missing – along with the clamp.The traffic police then lodged a complaint at the Malad police station and an FIR was registered against the driver.“Following the FIR, we immediately traced the car and arrested the driver,Dubey, who had replaced the clamped wheel with the spare one and driven off without informing the police. He was arrested under relevant sections of thefor theft,” a police officer said.Similarly, on April 12, an Alto car driver also made off with the clamp without contacting the Malad traffic division. Although in this case police are yet to trace the car or arrest the driver. “This is happening frequently nowadays. It seems motorists are taking the issue lightly,” a senior traffic policeman said. “However, this will not be tolerated. Motorists engaging in such acts would be booked under IPC as well as the Motor Vehicles Act.”Explaining the rules, the officer said: “If the vehicle is towed away the motorist has to pay towing charges as well – Rs 200 for two-wheelers and Rs 600 for four-wheelers. At first we just clamp the wheel and leave a note asking the motorists to approach the traffic division and pay the fine. If we don’t hear from them for two days we tow away the vehicle and charge them Rs 50 per hour for abandoning it.“Motorists should understand that clamps are government property and carting them away is illegal.”
