Aam Aadmi Party: AAP skips Lok Sabha Elections after poor result in assembly polls

The Aam Aadmi Party (AAP), which created a lot of buzz but could not win much votes in the 2014 Lok Sabha elections in Bengaluru, has stayed away from the polls this time around. While the result of the Assembly polls in Karnataka last May came as a shocker, the party plans to go in a methodical way to fight next year’s civic (BBMP) polls in Bengaluru and is working ground up.“We did not see any opportunity in fielding candidates for the Lok Sabha election. The party is concentrating in states such as New Delhi, Punjab and Haryana where it can win. As it is in many states, people in Karnataka are either voting for Modi to win or lose. Hence, the party has decided not to contest as we do not want to divide anti-Modi vote,” Prithvi Reddy, convener of AAP, Karnataka, told ET.In the 2014 Lok Sabha polls, the AAP had fielded candidates in almost all the 28 constituencies in the state. The candidature of formerCFO V Balakrishnan, former registrar and faculty of National Law School of India University Prof Babu Mathew and child rights activist Nina P Nayak had drawn a lot of praise and brought attention to the party. In some Lok Sabha seats, the party candidates emerged distant third but none of them were able to give a tough fight.The party’s vote count, however, hit an all-time low in the 2018 Assembly elections garnering only 0.06% vote share despite fielding candidates across in all Assembly seats. The vote share was lower than that of Mayawati’s Bahujan Samaj Party (0.30%) and Bihar chief minister Nitish Kumar’s Janata Dal-United (0.11%).“When we fought Assembly election, a lot of people told us to contest in the BBMP election. We have decided to start at the grassroots as only real issues matter to the people more than anything. We are sure people will support us. We will soon start a movement ahead of the BBMP election,” Reddy said. The party’s convener had contested against Congress leader KJ George in Sarvagnanagar but managed only 1,859 votes.Currently, the party is supporting the candidature of actor Prakash Raj, an independent from Bangalore Central and BSP’s CS Dwarakanath in Chikkaballapur.Both V Balakrishnan and Babu Mathew, who contested in the 2014 Lok Sabha election, said money and caste play a larger role. “For a startup party like ours, fighting the Lok Sabha election is not easy. Our resources are limited. Hence, we have decided to build the party, starting from the BBMP election,” Balakrishnan said.Mathew said AAP did not contest parliamentary election in Karnataka as the battle was primarily between the BJP and the Congress. “We are better equipped to fight corporation elections. Our programmes and policies that were introduced in New Delhi have attained national and international recognition,” he said.One of the reasons for the party’s failure to expand its base in Karnataka was the infighting among its leaders. Social activist Ravi Krishna Reddy, who was one of the early members of the AAP in Karnataka, said he quit the party as the leadership in Karnataka was not willing to fight electoral politics. “Even the party leadership in Delhi did not take it seriously to expand its base. The people who were working hard for the party were neglected,” he said. Reddy is now working on the formation of new political party, called Karnataka Rasthra Samiti, to provide space for “clean and honest politics.”
