Imagine Owning Bombay Rayon Fashions (NSE:BRFL) And Taking A 95% Loss Square On The Chin

Some stocks are best avoided. We really hate to see fellow investors lose their hard-earned money. Spare a thought for those who held Bombay Rayon Fashions Limited (NSE:BRFL) for five whole years - as the share price tanked 95%. And we doubt long term believers are the only worried holders, since the stock price has declined 77% over the last twelve months. Unhappily, the share price slid 1.1% in the last week.

While a drop like that is definitely a body blow, money isn't as important as health and happiness.

View our latest analysis for Bombay Rayon Fashions

Because Bombay Rayon Fashions is loss-making, we think the market is probably more focussed on revenue and revenue growth, at least for now. Shareholders of unprofitable companies usually expect strong revenue growth. That's because it's hard to be confident a company will be sustainable if revenue growth is negligible, and it never makes a profit.

Depicted in the graphic below, you'll see revenue and earnings over time. If you want more detail, you can click on the chart itself.

This free interactive report on Bombay Rayon Fashions's balance sheet strength is a great place to start, if you want to investigate the stock further.

A Different Perspective

Investors in Bombay Rayon Fashions had a tough year, with a total loss of 77%, against a market gain of about 0.9%. However, keep in mind that even the best stocks will sometimes underperform the market over a twelve month period. Unfortunately, last year's performance may indicate unresolved challenges, given that it was worse than the annualised loss of 46% over the last half decade. We realise that Buffett has said investors should 'buy when there is blood on the streets', but we caution that investors should first be sure they are buying a high quality businesses. Before spending more time on Bombay Rayon Fashions it might be wise to click here to see if insiders have been buying or selling shares.

Story continues

Of course Bombay Rayon Fashions may not be the best stock to buy. So you may wish to see this free collection of growth stocks.

Please note, the market returns quoted in this article reflect the market weighted average returns of stocks that currently trade on IN exchanges.

We aim to bring you long-term focused research analysis driven by fundamental data. Note that our analysis may not factor in the latest price-sensitive company announcements or qualitative material.



If you spot an error that warrants correction, please contact the editor at editorial-team@simplywallst.com. This article by Simply Wall St is general in nature. It does not constitute a recommendation to buy or sell any stock, and does not take account of your objectives, or your financial situation. Simply Wall St has no position in the stocks mentioned. Thank you for reading.
