Central Maharashtra likely to see light rains

On Sunday, few parts of Mumbai also witnessed light rains.

Mumbai: Mumbai and other parts of Maharashtra must brace themselves for light rains as pre-monsoon showers are likely to hit central Maharashtra. For the past 24 hours since Saturday, a few parts of Maharashtra have received light rains and thunderstorms along with dust storms in isolated areas of the state. On Sunday, few parts of Mumbai also witnessed light rains.

The Indian Meteorological Department (IMD) has issued a warning about thunderstorms and lightning, which are likely to take place over central Maharashtra till April 16. These areas include Thane, Palghar and Pune along with Marathwada and Vidarbha.

According to the IMD, the weather conditions could be attributed to the cyclonic circulation persisting over south of central Maharashtra.

“Along with this, a trough is extending from West Madhya Pradesh towards Karnataka, falling over parts of Maharashtra,” said an IMD official.

Officials further stated that the extra moisture formation would lead to light rains in isolated parts of Maharashtra.

Skymet Weather, a private weather forecasting agency, also stated that scattered rain and thundershowers accompanied with isolated hailstorm activities are expected to occur today over parts of Maharashtra particularly central Maharashtra and Vidarbha region.

“On April 15 and 16, we expect the intensity and spread of weather activities to increase over Maharashtra and many parts may receive light to moderate rain and thundershower activities accompanied with strong winds and lightning strikes. An isolated hailstorm cannot be ruled out,” read the report.

Meanwhile, Mumbai may also receive few spells of rain and thundershowers during this period.

In the meantime, Mumbai recorded a spike in the day temperature on Sunday as the maximum temperature recorded for 34.5, one degree above the normal, after recording 33 degrees last week.

The minimum temperature was recorded at 24 degrees. Humidity levels were also recorded at 69 per cent.
