Dangerous Political Speeches

Election Commission of India

Yogi Adityanath

Bahujan Samaj Party

Deoband

Rahul Gandhi

Samajwadi Party

Jaya Prada

Election speeches exhibit much variety. Some of them show wisdom and experience, some others political naivete. Some deploy wit, some others anger and ridicule. Some are morally earnest, some jaded. Some are superbly creative, some cliché-ridden. Some are gracious, some lack dignity. And some are simply dangerous. The last few days have taken us up close to speeches of the last variety.Yesterday, thebarred, the Chief Minister of Uttar Pradesh, and Mayawati, the leader of, from campaigning, respectively, for three and two days. It had acted in response to the Supreme Court’s chastisement about its inability to act decisively when the model code of election conduct was violated.At a rally inon April 7, Mayawati had asked the Muslim community not to “split votes” between the Congress and her alliance in Uttar Pradesh. Two days later, Yogi Adityanath had responded to her remarks at a public rally in Meerut, “If the Congress, the SP and the BSP have faith in Ali, then we have faith in Bajrang Bali, the followers of Bajrang Bali will not tolerate them.” The Supreme Court was clear that both of these speeches violated the code of election conduct which forbids securing votes through appeals to caste or communal feelings.While Mayawati represented her alliance as the true guardian of Muslim interest, by identifying his party with Bajrang Bali, or Lord Hanuman, and the opposition parties with Ali, the successor of Prophet Mohammad, Adityanath was projecting his party, the BJP, as a party of Hindus and its rival parties as those of the Muslims.On the face of it, both Mayawati and Yogi Adityanath are appealing to community identities in an electoral context. But their actions should be deplored for different reasons. Mayawati sought to monopolize Muslim support without however stoking malice among religious communities whereas Yogi Adityanath’s black and white division of the electorate into Hindus and Muslims brought with it an othering of the Muslim communities. His remarks of course form part of an eco-system of deep prejudice against the Muslim and Christian communities of India that his party, the BJP, has helped strengthen.At a rally in Telengana three days ago, Amit Shah, the President of the BJP declared: “We will ensure implementation of NRC in the entire country. We will remove every single infiltrator from the country, except Buddha (sic), Hindus and Sikhs.” Let alone the absence of a noble statesman-like attitude on the issue of migrants in the country, his remark is openly hostile to several great religious communities of India. If one were strict about compiling a National Registry of Citizens, all “infiltrators” ought to matter, not just those belonging to a few religious communities.Reinforcing Shah’s hardline attitude towards internal security, the Union Home Minister, Rajnath Singh, coldly affirmed his party’s commitment to retaining sedition law: “If it’s within our powers, we will make the sedition law even more stringent. We will make such a strict law that it would send shivers down their spine.” Such a defiance towards the near-consensus seen among the other political parties towards scrapping the sedition law, which has been used so often to harass innocent Indians, shows little respect for protecting civil freedom of Indian citizens.A few days ago, Maneka Gandhi, Union Minister for Women and Child Development, made a speech threatening towards the Muslim electorate in Sultanpur, where she is contesting as BJP candidate. Saying she had already won the election, she said she would feel better if that happened with Muslim support. If the latter didn’t support her but asked her help to get jobs afterwards, she continued, she wouldn’t be able to oblige them.Prime Minister Modi’s response to’s decision to contest from Wayanad is also illustrative of the fast declining standards of political discourse. At a rally in Nanded, he said, “The Congress dynast went out with a microscope to look for a safe seat and selected one where the majority is in minority.” Reducing elections to the arithmetic of Hindu majority and non-Hindu minority holds out the dangerous model of majoritarian politics.Rahul Gandhi’s remark that Modi kicked Advani off the stage (“Joota marke stage se utara”) was in poor taste. Andleader, Azam Khan’s comment that’s underwear was coloured khaki was surely not dignified. But the comments sampled earlier in the essay are playing with fire. They appeal to base political instincts. They stir violence. They harm the political future of the country.
