Kanchana 3 director Raghava Lawrence warns Seeman in a lengthy cautionary note; Read On

Choreographer turned director Raghava Lawrence has geared up for the release of Kanchana 3. While the recently released teaser of the film opened to massive response, Raghava is unhappy over the recent hate comments on him. According to reports, actor turned politician Seeman and party candidates are constantly targetting Lawrence in their speeches and have been abusing him on social media and public events. Raghava Lawrence decided to hit back but made sure of not mentioning Naam Thamizhar Katchi chief Seeman's name in his post. Kanchana 3 director took to Facebook and wrote a long post on how Seeman's party is unnecessarily commenting in a very cheap manner about his philanthropic activities.

Raghava Lawrence writes, “Your party functionaries are unnecessarily commenting in a very cheap manner about my philanthropic activities in social media platforms. They are outright crass and vulgar. This has caused a lot of mental agony for me. When I participate in a public function, your party people come there and speak in unparliamentary words. All these have begun since the time when you started badmouthing about me in your meetings. I don’t care about these things. But differently-abled people who I am taking care, your people continue to harass them wherever they go through their words and actions”

.

He continues, “I can tolerate whatever happens to me but I can’t when it comes to my children who are differently-abled and also my fans. I do not know anything in politics and I am a zero in it. Earlier on, I was a zero in dancing but I learnt the art. I had been a zero in direction but I learnt it too. I was also a zero in production but now I have learnt it. So, don’t make me learn politics. I will learn it and become a hero in it. You speak a lot but I serve a lot. If both of us sit in a stage and list out the good things that we have done to society, I will have many. Would you have? This is election time. That’s why I have not mentioned your name in goodwill. If you feel what I say is right, please call me for a discussion. We can sort things out. Let us do our respective jobs peacefully. Live and let live. But if you and your followers decide to approach this only as an issue, I am ready for that too. Peace or problem? You decide. The choice is yours!”
