Modi will have to lose and go in elections: Farooq

Modi will have to lose and go in elections: Farooq

SRINAGAR, Apr 15: Accusing Prime Minister Narendra Modi of being a “casteist and communal”, NC President Dr Farooq Abdullah today said It is Modi and Amit Shah who would destroy India.

The three times Chief Minister dared PM Modi to beat drums of Kashmir integral part of India by holding rally in the valley than in Kathua if he really means what he says.

“Modi it’s you and Amit Shah who would destroy India not NC, “Farooq asserted while being quick to add you will never succeed to destroy India.

Taking a jibe at PM Modi for his statement in Kathua that NC will divide India, he said India would not have been integral had NC any plans to disintegrate it.

Foretelling BJP’s humiliating defeat in parliamentary polls, the NC President said Modi will have to go “he will also be destroyed like Pharaoh (Firaon) destroyed the chasing Musa”.

He said Modi like people never remember true nationalist like Saif-ud-Din Kichloo of Baramulla Kashmir who laid down his life fighting Britishers during Jallianwala Bagh massacre but those who killed Gandhi Ji.

“Do you remember who was there to fight Britishers when worst ever massacre of Jallianwala Bagh in which thousands were killed took place, he was Saif-ud-Din Kichloo from Baramullah, but you only remember killers of Gandhi Ji,” Farooq said hitting out at PM Modi.

The NC leader went on to say that he will prefer to die but will never support BJP at any cost.

“Least you can do is killing me, come if you can but remember I will never support you no matter what,” added Farooq.

Taking a jibe at Modi for allegedly befooling people on airstrike in Pakistan’s Balakot sector earlier this year, he said since he has failed he has nothing to say other than misleading people of India.

“You keep on beating drums of airstrike on Pakistan, you did nothing, yes few tress fell apart, how long will you befool people of India,” said Farooq.

He also lashed out at Governor Satyapal Malik who he said prevents people from visiting Kashmir and performing Amarnath Yatra.

“Remember Modi Allah is supreme of all and he won’t leave us hungry,” Farooq added.

On 80,000 crore PM package to Jammu and Kashmir, the NC President asked the Prime Minister to explain as to where the amount was used.
