Priyanka will pose tough challenge to PM Modi if she contests from Varanasi: Robert Vadra

"Rahulji will lead the country and I and Priyanka are with him," Vadra said, adding that his birthday falls on April 18 and he often visits the less privileged for pre-celebration. The latest entrant from the Nehru-Gandhi family had last month sent ripples across the political spectrum after her swift riposte "Why not Varanasi" to the party workers' request to contest elections from her mother Sonia Gandhi's constituency Rae Bareli. Priyanka is the Congress' big hope for the 2019 Lok Sabha elections and she is trying to revive the party's fortunes in Uttar Pradesh, especially in the eastern part of the state. She was made the All India Congress Committee (AICC) in-charge of eastern UP in January. Last month, she had taken the river route to visit parts of eastern UP, including Prime Minister's constituency Varanasi. Had the younger Gandhi sibling jumped into the fray against Modi, then it would have been the most high-profile contest of the current Lok Sabha polls.

NEW DELHI: Robert Vadra, husband of Congress general secretary Priyanka Gandhi, believes his wife will give a tough fight to Prime Minister Narendra Modi is she contests against him from Varanasi in Uttar Pradesh. Vadra, who was celebrating his birthday with children at an orphanage, said the people want to change the government at the Centre and claimed the Congress, under the leadership of Rahul Gandhi, will return to power. "You will witness a major change after the May 23 results, which will be in our favour. People are unhappy with this government and they want change. They will come in numbers to vote for this," Vadra told ABP News. When asked if Priyanka would be able to pose a stiff challenge to Modi if the Congress decides to field her from Varanasi, Vadra said: “For sure, she will (give a tough fight). People look for her as a change like they see in Rahul Gandhi. I believe she can do it because people see their happiness in her."
