Will the true BJPian please stand up?

Ambreen is a well-known journalist and blogger. She has won several awards for her work. She has also worked with UNICEF and NASSCOM Foundation. As an Army wife, Ambreen has been involved in the welfare of retired soldiers, war widows, orphans and disabled soldiers. Ambreen, is the founder of an organisation called The Changemakers where she and her team identifies, mentors and guides the ex-servicemen, war widows war orphans, till they are firmly placed and secure in the professions of their choice. LESS ... MORE

In the last few years, we have seen a mind-numbing onslaught of religious politicization. Gone are the days when regional politics ruled the electorate, every single politician today is asking votes in the name of the religion, caste and sub-caste.

Muslims and minorities are being openly threatened of dire consequences by some leaders of Bhartiya Janta Party. While one wants to curse on the non-BJP voter, the other threatens not to give jobs if BJP doesn’t win. One BJP leader wants to take off the clothes of Muslims for their identification, while there has been an attempt to incite fear in the name of NRC.

The run-up to the general elections 2019, is marked with spiteful comments, personal attacks from gutter mouths in all the parties. Why I am highlighting Bhartiya Janta Party here, is because, it is, at present the ruling party and there are very good chances that they will come back to power. But I do have a few questions to the esteemed party members, irrespective of the positions or the post they hold and the supporters of BJP-

Do you agree with the polarization of society?

Do you think hate and communal violence is the solution to any issue?

Do you support hate speech?

Do you support this vitriolic atmosphere?

I am sure you don’t.

The crass, foul and uncouth language has become a part of vote bank politics, but it should not be a part of our beautiful Indian culture and should be immediately done away with. Most of you are Hindus following the finest religion in the world, that is, Hinduism, which is a way of life, which promotes a diversified society with pluralistic views. None of the Gods, like Lord Ram, Vishnu, Krishna ever supported violence against the non-believers of Hinduism, then why do you? There have always been different castes, sub-castes with varied cultural beliefs and religious practices but never has India witnessed such acerbic attacks.

You assert that BJP is the party of Hindus, but then why has it been hijacked by vandals? What happened to the original BJP ideology of “Integral Humanism”? Party has definitely benefited from playing the communal card but please don’t let this vitriol enter your right-thinking heart and mind that you start losing the core values of true Hindusim. BJP is your party and only you have the power to make it the best political party in the world, imbibing all the core values of Hinduism. Take it back from the clutches of fanatics. Let Hinduism be your guiding light, not divisive politics.

I leave you with this thought, with a hope of bringing back Ram Rajya, where every soul is respected and every life cherished.

Jai Hind.

Facebook Twitter Linkedin Email Disclaimer Views expressed above are the author's own.
