Cong resorting to anti-India, anti-Army rhetoric out of insecurity: Jitendra Singh

Union Minister Jitendra Singh Tuesday accused the Congress of resorting to "anti-India and anti-Army rhetoric" out of insecurity, and asserted that Prime Minister Narendra Modi will never allow anti-nationals to succeed in their designs.

On the last day of campaigning ahead of the second phase of polling on April 18, Singh, who is seeking re-election from Udhampur, addressed a series of meeting here and claimed that the poll this time is no longer confined to just electing a member of Parliament.

"It is going to be a decisive battle to decide what kind of India we wish to leave for our children," he said.

"Congress, its allies and all those political parties and leaders who have ganged up against the BJP and Modi, are feeling so insecure that they have resorted to anti-India and anti-Army rhetoric," Singh said.

However, Modi will never allow anti-nationals to succeed in their designs, he asserted.

The Union Minister claimed the Congress has become so "rattled" after being voted out of power in 2014, that it has sought alliance with parties like the National Conference, which "advocate pre-1953 position for Jammu and Kashmir and a separate prime minister".

On the other hand, the BJP, even when not in power, never compromised on its commitment towards maintaining the sovereignty and integrity of India or in its supreme regard for the Indian Army, Singh said.

He said, "Each and every vote cast for BJP will be a vote to reiterate their resolve of 'nation first' as well as a for the development which led to huge transformation of the Udhampur-Kathua-Doda region in the last five years."



Over 16.85 lakh electorate will on April 18 decide the fate of 12 candidates in the Udhampur Lok Sabha constituency, spread over 17 Assembly segments in six districts -- Kishtwar, Doda, Ramban, Reasi, Udhampur and Kathua.

Prominent among the contestants include BJP's Jitendra Singh, Dogra dynasty scion and Congress candidate Vikramaditya Singh, Dogra Swabhiman Sangathan (DSS) founder Choudhary Lal Singh and National Panthers party chairman Harsh Dev Singh.

The National Conference (NC) has extended support to the Congress in Udhampur, while the PDP has also not fielded any candidate from the seat.

(This story has not been edited by Business Standard staff and is auto-generated from a syndicated feed.)
