Modi's lies, deceit can't save BJP's sinking ship: Azad

Modi's lies, deceit can't save BJP's sinking ship: Azad

SRINAGAR, Apr 16: Senior Congress leader Ghulam Nabi Azad today said people have realised that "political opportunism" of prime minister Narendra Modi and his "lies and deceit" would not be able to save the "sinking ship" of the Bharatiya Janata Party (BJP).

In an election rally in south Kashmir's Anantnag Lok Sabha constituency, Azad said the BJP had not been able to fulfil any of the promises made in the 2014 election campaign and that the party after coming to power, had destroyed the constitutional fabric of the country.

"Modi's lies and deceit will not save the sinking ship of the BJP, as the people have realised the exploitation and political opportunism on part of the outgoing prime minister," Azad said.

"Never in the history have four senior judges of the Supreme Court come out and said that democracy was in danger in the country," he said.

Azad said that the centre over the past five years had filled up independent constitutional institutions and academic institutions, like universities, with people from the RSS.

"RSS people are handpicked and placed in independent institutions or appointed as vice-chancellors. This is what is called dictatorship," he said.

He blamed the "wrong policies" adopted by the Centre for the deteriorating situation in Kashmir.

"The people of the country and state will never forgive the BJP for vitiating the atmosphere," Azad said.

Azad appealed to the people of Jammu and Kashmir to defeat the designs of the saffron party.

He expressed confidence that voters would ensure the victory of Congress candidates with a "thumping majority".

"The ensuing Lok Sabha election has provided you an opportunity to defeat the politics of exploitation and vendetta on the part of the BJP," he added.

Azad was campaigning for Congress candidate from the Anantnag Lok Sabha seat Ghulam Ahmad Mir, who is taking on PDP president Mehbooba Mufti.

Former high court judge Justice (retired) Hasnain Masoodi is contesting on a National Conference ticket, while the BJP has fielded Sofi Yousuf from the constituency where polling will be held in three phases 29 April 29 (Anantnag), May 3 (Kulgam) and 6 May (Pulwama and Shopian districts).

Later talking to media persons, Azad claimed that state Congress president and party candidate from Anantnag Lok Sabha constituency G A Mir will emerge victorious with the convincing margin and called BJP an enemy party for people all over India.

“If Kashmir witnesses good turnout which usually witnessed in valley, Mir will win from Anantnag Lok Sabha constituency with a thumping majority.”

When asked about the possible outcome of the Lok Sabha elections in the country, Azad said, “BJP under the leadership of Modi is banking upon malfunctioning and glitching of electronic voting machines as otherwise Congress party will win the ongoing parliamentary elections overwhelmingly,” adding that “BJP is polarizing Hindus and Muslims all over India to retain power at the centre.”

About alliance with National Conference, Azad said, “Congress party is present everywhere in every state of the country and has alliance with several regional parties in several states of the country but when regional parties demand bigger share the Congress party takes its own course.”

He blamed BJP for exploiting farmers forced to commit suicides now and sought clarifications from Prime Minister Modi on the promise of transferring lakhs of rupees to the bank accounts of farmers. He also accused Modi government of failing to secure the lives and chastity of girl child despite drum beating on “Beti Bachao, Beti Padao”. “They have failed to ensure security of women across country,” Azad added.

He said even if BJP rules for the next 200 years, Congress will never allow them to revoke Article 370. “Till Congress exists in India, it will never allow BJP to revoke Article 370,” he said.
