Will fight elections with full dignity, says Rajnath Singh on Poonam Sinha contesting against him

Lucknow (Uttar Pradesh) [India], Apr 16 (ANI): Union Home Minister Rajnath Singh on Tuesday said that his party will fight the Lok Sabha elections with full dignity against Poonam Sinha, who is contesting against him as SP-BSP-RLD candidate from Lucknow.

Talking to ANI, Singh said: "In a democracy, someone has to contest against someone. We will fight elections with full dignity. Lucknow is known for its good manners and we will fight the polls in the same spirit."

Poonam Sinha, who is the wife of actor-politician Shatrughan Sinha, joined the Samajwadi Party (SP) earlier on Tuesday and will contest against Rajnath Singh from Lucknow Parliamentary constituency.

On being asked about how tough the contest will be in Uttar Pradesh, the Union minister said, "There is no tough fight in here. The SP-BSP-RLD alliance has not been able to make itself credible in front of the people."

"In a healthy democracy, every institution must be respected," the BJP leader said, while commenting on the decision of the Election Commission of India (ECI) to ban Uttar Pradesh chief minister Yogi Adityanath and BSP chief Mayawati for campaigning in polls for 72 and 48 hours, respectively.

Replying to a question regarding SP leader Azam Khan's comment on BJP candidate from Rampur, Jaya Prada, Singh said, "Those who use abusive words are not accepted by the people in India."

Commenting on the Lok Sabha elections, he said, "Narendra Modi will emerge as the Prime Minister of the country again and NDA will attain two-third majority easily."

On questioning about Congress president Rahul Gandhi using Rafale deal issue to target PM Modi, Singh said, "In last 30 years, the Congress government has not provided the next generation fighter jets to our defence forces."

"For the first time, a Prime Minister has taken a decision to provide next-generation fighter jets to our forces and that has to be appreciated," he added. (ANI)
