It will be Modi sarkar in Delhi and BJP government in Odisha: PM Narendra Modi

BHUBANESWAR/SAMBALPUR: For the first time in years, the party in power is fighting an election with full support from the people of this country, Prime Minister Narendra Modi said at an election rally in the state capital even as he predicted a BJP win in Odisha , which he said was based on the feedback he has received after the first phase of election.“After the first phase of election, the feedback that we are getting from Odisha is that in Delhi it will be Modi sarkar, while in Odisha it is certain that the BJP will come to power,” Modi said at an election rally in Sambalpur , his fourth in the state since polls were announced on March 10.This he attributed to the immense popularity his government enjoys among the people. “India is seeing such an election after a long time where the incumbent government enjoys full support of the people even as the opposition is faltering,” Modi said later in the day in Bhubaneswar, at the end of a road show that witnessed a huge turnout.Continuing his tirade against the Congress’s dynasty politics and its weak response to terrorism, Modi said, “Congress ran governments when terrorists would strike at will and return. It had no faith in itself, or in its people. The Congress could do anything, stoop to any low for vote bank politics,” the Prime Minister said.Stating that ‘New India’ is different, he added, “It’s not in Modi’s nature to ignore terrorism. When the country showed its power, the entire world stood by it. The world will listen to your appeal for peace if you have the strength. Chance of peace in the subcontinent is more now.”Accusing the Naveen Patnaik-led BJD government of spreading lies, Modi said, “Seeing its imminent defeat, the BJD is spreading lies that if BJP comes to power, it will stop many welfare schemes. BJP will not stop any welfare schemes. It will only stop middlemen.”Modi also raised the issue of the murder of BJP worker Manguli Jena at Khurda on Sunday evening. “It is a reaction from goons who are seeing power slipping out of their hands. Odisha has to be freed from the clutches of goons. The BJP government in Odisha will do that,” the Prime Minister said.Questioning Naveen’s government track record in the past 19 years, Modi said, “A coterie is enjoying power, halting the development of Odisha.” He added, “If the government here engages itself in the protection of chit fund scam accused and mining mafia, how will it think about the common man.”
