Gujarat: No work for you if no votes for BJP, MLA warns voters

In yet another instance of voters being threatened by candidates, a BJP MLA allegedly issued a threat that work would be sparse if fewer votes were cast in the party's favour from their booth.

Ramesh Katara, the MLA from Fatepura ST seat in Dahod district, allegedly also told villagers while campaigning that cameras had been installed in the booth and so they would know who voted for the BJP.

"The vote is a weapon in your hand and you can decide who to vote for. You will see the photo of (BJP candidate from Dahod LS seat) Jashwantsinh Bhabhor, and the lotus (BJP's symbol) on the EVM. Look for it and press the button. There should not be any mistake, as (Narendra) Modi saheb has installed cameras this time," Katara is heard telling a group of villagers in his constituency.

"Who voted for the BJP and who voted for the Congress, it can be seen. The Aadhaar card, election card, ration card, and all other cards have your photos now. If there are less votes (for BJP) from your booth, we will come to know who did not cast the vote for us and then you will not get work," he says further in a video that has gone viral on social media.

Later in the day, the Congress filed a complaint against Katara with the state's chief electoral officer.

"BJP leaders are openly threatening and intimidating voters, which is a clear violation of the Model Code of Conduct," state Congress spokesperson Manish Doshi said. State's chief electoral officer S Murali Krishna said that they have received information about the speech. "We are looking into it," he said.

When contacted, Katara said that he had not threatened the voters, but sought their support for his party.

"Work is and will be given to beneficiaries irrespective of who they vote for. The Narendra Modi government believes in Sabka Saath, Sabka Vikas," the two-term MLA told DNA.

Katara is the latest among BJP leaders who have threatened voters since the announcement of elections. BJP MLA Madhu Shrivastav was previously issued a stern warning by the Election Commission for threatening voters of dire consequences if they did not vote for BJP. MP and BJP candidate from Rajkot Mohan Kundariya also threatened to shut down a mandli if he did not get 70-75 per cent votes from the town. Similarly, minister Kunvarji Bavaliya had courted controversy when he told a group of women complaining about water shortage that he had received only 45-50 per cent of their votes.

Voters’ Worry
