jet airways: 20,000 families’ fate hinges on Jet wing & prayer

Jet Airways crisis: Airline to make final bid to ask lenders to release interim funds

MUMBAI: In her 12-year career as a cabin crew member, Jet is the only airline that Shreya (name changed), a single parent with an eight-year old son with special needs, has worked for. Like Shreya, for close to 50% of Jet pilots and about 90% of its cabin crew members and a majority of ground staff, Jet has been the only employer they have ever known. If the airline announces suspension of operations, the 14,000-odd people employed with Jet, many of whom have been with the airline for over two decades, would face the daunting prospects of not bringing home a salary, of hunting for a job in a market where there are hardly any matching offers.“For over 50% of its pilots, Jet is the only airline they have worked for," said Capt Asim Valiani of National Aviator’s Guild Jet’s pilot union . About 500 of the 1,800 pilots on Jet’s rolls have over 10,000 hours of experience, which puts them in the “highly experienced” category. Said another Jet commander: “Most pilots would have some or the other form of EMI. When your family grows, you move to a bigger flat, depending on salary. In Mumbai, a 2BHK would cost not less than Rs 2.5 crore, which would mean the EMI would be Rs 1.6 lakh on a 20-year loan."Senior commanders earn a gross salary of over Rs 10 lakh a month, apart from flying allowances . The last salary that the pilots, engineers and senior management executives received was for December. About 20 days ago, a Mumbai-based, 42-year old Jet pilot suffered a heart attack. “He almost died. The family is shattered. He was playing with his son, suddenly he had chest pain and he just collapsed. He has huge hospital bills, no salary and no medical insurance,’’ said the commander.“The situation is much worse for the ground staff, loaders, cleaners,” he added. There are 6269 contract staff employed by 16 contractors across India to work as loaders, cleaners, utility staff. “We’ve paid them salaries for March from our pocket,’’ said Deepak Gaikwad, managing director, Target Hospitality, which handles ground jobs for Jet at five airports, including Mumbai. “If the airline shuts down, these contract workers would be jobless. They live hand-to-mouth, support families back in their villages,’’ said Gaikwad.
