Sadhvi Pragya joins BJP, may contest Lok Sabha polls from Bhopal

Sadhvi Pragya joins BJP, may contest Lok Sabha polls from Bhopal

"I have formally joined the BJP; I will contest the elections and win,” she told the media.

news Lok Sabha 2019

Sadhvi Pragya Singh Thakur joined the Bharatiya Janata Party (BJP) at the party office in New Delhi on Thursday. “I have formally joined the BJP; I will contest the elections and win,” she told the media.

According to a report, she met former Madhya Pradesh Chief Minister Shivraj Singh Chouhan and other senior BJP leaders at the party office.

In October last year, she expressed her inclination towards joining politics, saying she would surely do so ‘if the nation wants’.

“If the nation wants, and if the nation gives me a call, I will surely join politics."

She is also being considered as one of the candidates to go up against Congress leader and Rajya Sabha MP Digvijay Singh in the Lok Sabha polls.

On April 12, she denied having been approached for the contest, but she said she would be glad to challenge an anti-Hindu leader like Digvijaya Singh.

Congress hasn't won Bhopal since 1989. The Bhopal constituency is a BJP citadel as the party has not lost the seat since 1989.

Pragya, who holds a Master's degree in History, had been associated with Akhil Bhartiya Vidhyarthi Parishad (ABVP) and 'Durga Vahini' or women's wing of the Vishwa Hindu Parishad (VHP). She is known for rabble-rousing speeches.

Sadhvi Pragya was charged in the Malegaon blasts that killed seven people in Maharashtra in September 2008. She spent nine years in jail in connection with the case and is presently out on bail.

After the court dropped provisions of the Maharashtra Control of Organised Crime Act (MCOCA) against her, she is being tried under the Unlawful Activities Prevention Act (UAPA). In 2017, the NIA told the court that they had no objection to discharging her from the case as there is no prosecutable evidence against her. She was granted bail by the Bombay High Court last year.

Six people were killed and over 100 injured when an explosive device strapped on a motorcycle went off near a mosque in Malegaon in north Maharashtra, on September 29, 2008.

With IANS inputs
