SP fields Shatrughan's wife Poonam Sinha from Lucknow

The Wednesday fielded actor-turned-politician Shatrughan Sinha's wife Poonam Sinha as its candidate from Lucknow, the constituency where the BJP has fielded Union Home Minister

The candidature was announced by Akhilesh Yadav, a day after Poonam Sinha joined his party.

"After due deliberations with the party leaders, it has been decided that Poonam Sinha will be the party nominee from seat," Yadav told reporters here.

Poonam Sinha had joined the in the presence of party leader in on Tuesday, the day when the sitting MP, filed his nomination papers.

"The will fight the election on the seat only on the basis of the development works done by the and BSP governments ," Yadav said.

Reminding people of Lucknow of the work done in the past by his party, the SP chief appealed to them to vote for Sinha.

"It is said that the first MP from here had been a woman," he said.

Poonam Sinha's husband had recently quit the and joined the

To a question, Yadav said, "The BJP has always tried to retire those who make their manifesto and deny him ticket."



Referring to BJP leader Murli Manohar Joshi, Yadav said the one who made the manifesto in 2014 for the saffron party has been denied ticket this time and the one who has made the manifesto this time will be denied ticket next time.

had led the BJP's 'sankalp patra' (manifesto) committee ahead of the polls this time.

When asked to comment on the alleged derogatory comment made by senior party leader on Jaya Parda, Yadav said this was a BJP conspiracy to divert the public's attention.

The respect given to mothers and daughters in our party is not less than what is extended by other parties, he said.

"There is no talk on the expressway, but one word was picked up from Azam Khan's speech and debated upon as this is election time," Yadav said.

Party MP Dimple Yadav, who was also present, said remarks of any kind on women were not right but questioned the silence over alleged adverse comments made by BJP supporters against BSP

"Why was there no debate on what was said about me and Why is only an adverse comment on BJP candidates raised," she asked.

(Only the headline and picture of this report may have been reworked by the Business Standard staff; the rest of the content is auto-generated from a syndicated feed.)
