Hydrocarbons Current Affairs, GK & News

Hydrocarbons Current Affairs, GK & News

The Porsche has joined with Siemens Energy to produce eFuel by 2022. The project of eFuel production is called Haru Oni project. It is based in Chile due to its windy climate. The joint project aims to produce 130,000 litres of eFuel by 2022. Later this is to be increased to 550 million by 2026. ..

Month: Current Affairs - April, 2021

Category: Environment Current Affairs

Topics: audi • efuel • electro fuel • Hydrocarbons • porsche • siemens • Synthetic Fuel

On May 7, 2020, Indian Petroleum Minister Shri Dharmendra Pradhan and Russian Energy Minister alexander Novak held a meeting through video conference. The ministers reviewed ongoing projects. Highlights The ministers emphasized on the cooperation in coking sector. They also held talks about signing a Memorandum of Understanding on Coking coal. The Russian minister briefed about ..

Month: Current Affairs - May, 2020

Category: India Nation & States Current Affairs

Topics: coking coal • Hydrocarbons • India-Russia • Memorandum of Understanding (MoU) • national steel policy • OPEC • Organization of the Petroleum Exporting Countries (OPEC) • Steel • video conference

On February 10, 2020, Chief Minister of Tamil Nadu announced that Cauvery Delta is to be declared as Protected Special Agricultural Zone. In 2019, the Central Government had awarded the oil and gas exploration projects in the Cauvery basin. This invoked large protests amid water crisis in the state. Extraction of hydro carbon requires excess ..

Month: Current Affairs - February, 2020

Topics: Agriculture • Cauvery • Cauvery River • Chief Minister of Tamil Nadu • Environmental impact assessment • Hydrocarbon Resources • Hydrocarbons • ONGC • Tamil Nadu

Union Minister Dharmendra Pradhan said, India is among the top 10 FDI destinations in the world while addressing the investors in Abu Dhabi on 12 Nov at the roadshow organized by the Directorate General of Hydrocarbons (DGH) to promote India as a favorable investment destination in the oil and gas sector . India presently being ..

Topics: Abu Dhabi • Directorate General of Hydrocarbons • Energy • Fossil fuels • Hydrocarbons • Peak oil • Petroleum Industry • Petroleum politics

The Engineers at the Stanford University have developed a new catalyst that helps to turn carbon dioxide from cars into fuels like propane or natural gas. About the Research Catalysts induce chemical reactions without being used up in the reaction. In this new research scientists have combined ruthenium and iron oxide nano particles to form ..

Month: Current Affairs - October, 2019

Category: Science & Technology Current Affairs

Topics: Air pollution • Climate change • fossil fuel • Global warming • Hydrocarbons • Pollution • Unconventional Hydrocarbons
