Akhil slams BJP on bill

'BJP’s efforts to pass bill would thwart the National Register of Citizens (NRC) update process in the state'

He said BJP leaders, starting from Prime Minister Narendra Modi to party national president Amit Shah and general secretary Ram Madhav, have all said that the bill would be brought back if the BJP returns to power.

Krishak Mukti Sangram Samiti (KMSS) adviser Akhil Gogoi on Wednesday said the BJP will never solve the problem of illegal migrants in Assam, as evident from the ruling party’s insistence on re-introducing the Citizenship (Amendment) Bill, 2019, if it returns to power.

“It’s dangerous for the people of Assam. They have said they will bring the bill back and yet some people are willing to vote the BJP back to power. The BJP will never ever solve the issue of illegal migrants for which the people of the state have been fighting for decades,” Akhil told reporters here.

Assam has 14 Lok Sabha seats. Five constituencies voted in the first phase on April 11, five will poll in the second phase on April 18 and four will go to the polls in the third phase on April 23.

Akhil said the BJP’s efforts to bring back the bill would thwart the National Register of Citizens (NRC) update process under way in the state.

“If, by implementing the bill, they bring illegal migrants from the neighbouring countries, around Rs 2,000 crore of public money will be wasted. Besides, the BJP government will also never solve the border issue with Bangladesh,” he added.

Quoting Union home ministry records, Akhil said 50 per cent of the Indo-Bangladesh border was yet to be fenced.

“Of the 4,096-km border India shares with Bangladesh, only 2,785km was completed till December 2018, according to information provided by Union minister of state for home affairs Kiren Rijiju. And they have started doing smart fencing just to avoid the topic in the elections,” he said.

Akhil alleged that the BJP was using words like “Pakistan”, “Jinnah” and “Kashmir” to win public emotion.
