None can take away Kashmir: Shah

None can take away Kashmir: Shah

‘Will never allow 2 PMs in India

MUMBAI, Apr 17 (Agencies): Kashmir is an integral part of India and it would continue to remain so as long as the BJP exists, party president Amit Shah said here on Wednesday.

Shah's remarks came at a poll rally, in response to National Conference leader Omar Abdullah's recent suggestion of having a separate prime minister for Kashmir. “No one can take away Kashmir from us. As long as the BJP exists, Kashmir will continue to be an integral part of India,” Shah said. “We will never allow two prime ministers in India,” Shah said. “The Congress wants to separate Kashmir from India,” he added. Omar Abdullah's comment that Jammu and Kashmir bargained for a separate Prime Minister and President and hopefully they would have it, has also drawn a strong response from Prime Minister Narendra Modi, who demanded during a series of poll rallies that the Congress explain its ally's comment. “India is the land of Shivaji Maharaj and its security is responsibility of us all,” Shah said. Referring to cross-border terrorism emanating from Pakistan, Shah said, “If there is a goli (bullet) from there, India will send a gola (bomb) from here. Terrorists infiltrating in India will be searched and killed.” “Prime Minister Narednra Modi worked to make the country safe. Through Balakot air strike, we avenged the deaths of our soldiers. The chant of 'Phir ek baar Modi sarkar' is heard from all corners of the country now,” the BJP chief said.

Shah also targeted the Congress-NCP combine which was in power in Maharashtra for 15 consecutive years till 2014, when the BJP wrested power from it. “The Congress relegated Maharashtra on development front, while the BJP brought back the state on the path of development,” he said. Five generations of Congress ruled the country but did nothing for India, he said. “What did (Congress chief) Rahul Gandhi and (NCP president) Sharad Pawar do for the poor in India,” Shah said.

Shah also hit out at the opposition leaders for criticising the government’s move to identify illegal immigrants by rolling out the National Register of Citizens (NRC). He alleged that the opposition parties were more concerned about the human rights of infiltrators. “We have brought the Citizenship (Amendment) Bill to curb infiltration in the country, there is a strategy to remove 40 lakh infiltrators from Assam. Rahul baba, Sonia, Sharad Pawar and Mamta Banerjee opposedthe prime minister on this,” Shah said.

“I want to ask them if the infiltrators are their cousins. The opposition parties are more concerned about the human rights of infiltrators,” he said. “The intruders come into the country, explode bombs, create law and order problems, then what about the human rights of our people and soldiers?” he asked.
