Cong-AAP alliance talks reach dead end

Tie-up with AAP and JJP in Haryana, Punjab, was only wishful thinking of a few journalists: Surjewala

Talks between the Congress and the Aam Aadmi Party for an alliance ended on Thursday with senior leaders from both parties confirming that there was no further scope for it.

‘Forging alliance’

Congress leader P.C. Chacko said AAP had backtracked on the issue of forging an alliance with Congress after a final understanding over the seat sharing in Delhi was reached between both the parties.

“Congress president Rahul Gandhi made it very clear that the Congress was keen on an alliance in Delhi to defeat the BJP. However, AAP that brought the proposal for an alliance in the beginning backtracked and started demanding seats in other States as well,” Mr. Chacko said, adding that senior Congress leaders will be chosen as candidates for the May 12 election.

The list will be released soon, he said.

“The party had discussions with AAP leader Sanjay Singh and had arrived at a formula in which AAP would contest four seats and the Congress would contest three in Delhi but after that arrangement was reached, AAP started a discussion on other States as well,” he added.

AAP Delhi convener Gopal Rai said, while addressing a joint press conference with the Jannayak Janta Party (JJP) leader Dushyant Chautala, that there will be no alliance with Congress in Haryana or Delhi and the tie-up talks were over.

“We will give the people a strong alternative, AAP and JJP will work for the change and together fight the Lok Sabha election,” said Mr. Rai.

At the press conference, Mr. Chautala announced that the two parties will go forward with their alliance and AAP will fight in three of the 10 Lok Sabha seats of Haryana and JJP in the rest, as decided earlier.

“AAP will fight from Ambala, Karnal, and Faridabad,” said Mr. Chautala, adding: “In Haryana, from 1971, we have never worked with Congress and would not form an alliance with them.”

Announcing four of its seven candidates, the JJP said the other three candidates will be declared in the next 24 hours.

AAP did not announce any candidate but Mr. Rai said they will announce three of its candidates by Friday evening. Mr. Chautala said they would not form an alliance with Congress.

JJP’s four candidates

Mr. Chautala said he will contest from Hisar, and JJP’s Nirmal Singh Mahdi from Sirsa, Pradeep Deswal from Rohtak and Swati Yadav from Bhiwani–Mahendragarh.

Congress communication chief Randeep Singh Surjewala also ruled out an alliance with AAP and the Jannayak Janta Party (JJP) in Haryana and Punjab, saying that it was only “wishful thinking of a few journalists”.

Mr. Surjewala was interacting with the media persons at mini-secretariat in the afternoon after the filing of the nomination papers by the party’s Gurugram Lok Sabha candidate Capt. Ajay Yadav.

‘Pseudo-nationalism’

Expressing confidence about the victory of Capt. Yadav and the rest of the Congress candidates in Haryana, Mr. Surjewala said Prime Minister Narendra Modi once again wanted to cheat people in the name of pseudo-nationalism but he would not succeed this time.

Mr. Surjewala, a Kaithal MLA, said Mr. Modi had promised to bring back black money from abroad, provide two crore jobs to the youth and 50% profit to the farmers over and above the input costs, but had miserably failed to keep his promises.

“The people want to know why Mr. Modi does not talk about these issues anymore. Where are the acche din [good days] that he had promised?,” asked Mr. Surjewala.

He said the credit for making Gurugram the “Millennium City” goes to Congress, which had brought IT industries and set up industrial belts in the district.

Seeking to know the contribution of Haryana Chief Minister Manohar Lal Khattar and local MP Rao Inderjit Singh to the development of the city, he added that the Gurugram had now earned the dubious distinction of being the most-polluted city in the world under the BJP rule.

Despite the people of Gurugram contributing the maximum to the State exchequer, the city lacks the basic facilities such as roads and uninterrupted power supply, alleged Mr. Surjewala.

Communal forces

Capt. Yadav said the main objective of his party was to defeat the communal forces dividing the society in the name of religion and caste. He raked up the issue of incomplete projects of Defence University and Gurugram University in Gurugram and the railway connectivity in Mewat.

Capt. Yadav claimed that he had the support of all the local Congress leaders and would emerge victorious in the elections.
