LS polls Phase-II: Violence disrupts poll process in Manipur; re-poll likely in two booths

Over 75.69 % voters cast votes

Our Correspondent Imphal, April 18 (EMN): Voting was disrupted in two polling booths of Inner Manipur Lok Sabha constituency on Thursday after violence broke out over alleged proxy voting and dispute among the election agents.

An estimated 75.69 % of over nine lakh electorate exercised their franchise till 4 pm in the second phase of the general election, said Chief Electoral Officer PK Singh.

In one of the booths at Kiyamgei Muslim Makha locality in Imphal east district, unidentified men stormed into a polling station around 11.30 am and broke EVMs and VVPATs, claiming that “proxy voting” was being carried out in the station, he said.

It was only after the security personnel opened fire in the air, the mob dispersed, Singh said.

In another booth in the same area, a scuffle broke out between the polling agents of opposing political parties around 3pm, derailing the voting process.

The reason behind the skirmish between the agents was not clear as yet, the CEO said.

Re-polling is likely in the two booths of east Imphal district, election office sources said.

Under tight security measure, the polling was held at 1,300 polling stations, including 138 polling stations in four districts managed by only women polling officials. The polling stations in Yaiskul (38) and Bishnupur (40) assembly constituencies are manned by women for the first time in history. One polling station in Imphal east district was manned by persons with disabilities.

Manipur which is represented by two parliamentary constituencies- inner Manipur and outer Manipur (ST reserved).The first phase for outer Manipur was held on April 11.

Meanwhile Manipur Governor Dr. Najma Heptulla cast her vote at all women polling personnel manned 11/34 Old Lambulane (B) polling station which have 436 voters including 205 females, located in the heart of Imphal town.

Speaking to reporters after casting the vote, Dr. Heptulla who was earlier enrolled in New Delhi said that one should take their votes to the location where he or she stays saying nobody should waste their votes. “I feel very happy as I have participated in nation building by casting my vote today,” she said.

Dr. Heptulla said she has been fighting since she started voting.

After the Beijing declaration, she was the one who made a statement in the parliament that at least 33 percent representation women should be there in the parliament. “But I’m sorry that there is only 8 percent representation by all political parties. They should create an atmosphere wherein more women coming to the decision making process,” she said.

CEO who accompanied the governor’s said the Dr. Heptulla’s move can be considered a good sign of being a responsible citizen as it is the responsibility of a citizen to move her vote and not waste it when relocated to a new place.

Manipur Chief Minister N Biren and wife Heiyainu cast their votes at 216 Srivan High school Located Luwangsangbam Mamang Leikai Imphal East District (2).

Eleven candidates — Dr. RK Ranjan of BJP, O Nabakishore of Congress, Dr. M Nara of CPI, G Tonsana of Manipur Democratic People’s Front, S Nandeshore of Rashtriya Janhit Sangarsh Party, RK Anand of North East India Development Party, O Jugindro of Manipur People’s Party, RK Somorendro, M Tomtomsana, W Pobitro Singh, Md Iliyash Khan, all Independent are contesting for the coveted inner Manipur seat.

The fate of the candidates will be decided by the 9,28,626 electors including 4,47,843 males, 4,80,751 females and 32 third genders besides 4523 persons with disabilities.

More than 40 companies of the paramilitary forces and state police were deployed for the smooth conduct of the polling.

The state has two parliamentary constituencies, one of which went to polls in the first phase on April 11.

Meanwhile, Re-polling in 19 polling stations of Outer Manipur Parliamentary constituency passes off peacefully.
