Poll mood watered down by scarcity

VADODARA: It was supposed to be the most memorable day in the life of Asmita Bhil, but residents of her village Jambughoda in Chhota Udepur district will also remember her wedding, albeit for a different reason. The entire village travelled across the area in search of water to meet the requirements during marriage function. In fact, the haldi-clad bride too joined the procession to get whatever little water they could to serve the guests.It is not just Jambughoda village that is facing acute water crisis, but the entire tribal-dominated district is staring at a drought-like situation. The local authorities are contemplating curtailing water supply.“We have more than a dozen bore wells in our village, but only one provides us with water. We have made many representations to sarpanch and taluka panchayat but nothing has happened so far,” said Himmat Bhil, a farmer from Jambughoda.Residents of several villages in Bodeli taluka are also reeling under severe water scarcity . Locals believe that if this situation persists in every summer, they will have to migrate in coming years.“Wells have completely dried up due to which we have to bring water tankers from outside. If not today, after five years we will have to move to some other place,” said Navnit Patel, who lives in Mankani village.People also blame rampant sand mining in Orsang River for the current situation. “Due to sand mining, river bed is now full of large rocks that cannot hold water during summer. As the river has dried up, the water table has also gone down,” said Kartik Shah, deputy sarpanch of Bodeli gram panchayat. He added that May onwards the gram panchayat may be able to supply water only alternate days.Citizens of Chhota Udepur town have threatened of boycotting the Lok Sabha poll if sand mining is not stopped. Members of Chhota Udepur municipality have also joined the protest.Some members have sought permission from the district collector to sit on fast from April 15 if the geology department does not stop sand mining.
