Brahmastra, Super 30 to Bharat: 15 blockbuster movies you just shouldn't miss in 2019

If 2018 was all about low budget, high concept films making its mark at the box-office. The year 2019 is going to be all about big budget and high concept films. With some of the most awaited and anticipated films waiting to be released this year, 2019 would certainly prove out to be a blockbuster year for Hindi cinema.

From Brahmastra, Super 30 to Kalank; take a look at the 15 blockbuster movies you just shouldn't miss in 2019

Uri: Slated to release on January 11, the film will recount India's surgical strike on Pakistan in 2016. Vicky Kaushal would be seen playing the lead in the film as an army officer.

Manikarnika: Kangana Ranaut's magnum opus – Manikarnika – is a biopic on the life of Rani Laxmibai from Jhansi. The film is slated to release on January 25.

Super 30: After a hiatus, Hrithik Roshan would be seen playing the role of Anand Kumar, a mathematician who runs a training program for the underprivileged to help them crack IIT. The film is slated to release on January 25.

Thackeray: The film's trailer which has already received thunderous applause from the audience will have Nawazuddin Siddiqui playing the role of Bala Saheb Thackeray in his biopic. The film will release on January 25.

Ek Ladki Ko Dekha to Aisa Laga: India's first commercial film to deal with same-sex love, Sonam Kapoor and Anil Kapoor film is slated to release on February 1.

Gully Boy: The film featuring Mumbai's underground hip-hop scene is nothing like anything you've ever seen before. Starring Ranveer Singh and Alia Bhatt the film will release on February 14.

Total Dhamaal: Bringing back the famous pair – Madhuri Dixit Nene and Anil Kapoor together – the film is slated to release on February 22.

Kesari: Releasing on March 21, the film will re-live the Battle of Saragarhi – starring Akshay Kumar.

Mental Hai Kya: Starring Kangana Ranaut and Rajkummar Rao, the film is a comic-thriller slated to release on March 29.

Kalank: Starring Madhuri Dixit, Sanjay Dutt, Alia Bhatt and Varun Dhawan; the Karan Johar film is slated to release on April 19.

Student of the Year 2: Sequel to the hit franchise – Student of the Year – the film star Tiger Shroff, Ananya Pandey and Tara Sutaria in lead roles. The film is slated to release on May 10.

Bharat: Starring Katrina Kaif and Salman Khan, the film is slated to release on June 5.

Mission Mangal: Another mega project starring Akshay Kumar, based on India's Mars Mission, the film will release on August 15.

Tanaji: Ajay Devgn's film where he would be seen playing the role of Tanaji Malusare is slated to release on November 22.

Brahmastra: Starring Ranbir Kapoor, Alia Bhatt and Amitabh Bachchan – the fantasy trilogy is slated to release on December 25.
