New movies in theaters – The Curse of La Llorona and more! « Celebrity Gossip and Movie News

New movies in theaters – The Curse of La Llorona and more!

By Tribute on April 19, 2019 | 2 Comments

Opening in theaters across the country is the haunting tale of The Curse of La Llorona. If horror doesn’t pique your interest you can choose from other new releases including a drama, two biopics, a documentary, romance, or a sci-fi thriller. Happy long weekend! ~Emily Chavez

The Curse of La Llorona – In 1970s Los Angeles, when social worker Anna Garcia (Linda Cardellini) ignores the eerie warning of a mother suspected of child endangerment, her children are drawn into a frightening supernatural realm. Click here for showtimes.

Trailer: The Curse of La Llorona

Breakthrough– When John Smith, the 14-year-old son of Joyce Smith (Chrissy Metz), falls through the ice on a frozen lake in Missouri, he is pronounced dead. When he miraculously comes back to life, Joyce struggles to understand this unbelievable phenomenon. Based on Joyce Smith’s 2017 memoir. Click here for showtimes.

Trailer: Breakthrough

Penguins – A nature documentary about an Adélie penguin named Steve who joins millions of fellow male penguins in the icy Antarctic spring on a quest to find a life partner, build a suitable nest, and start a family. Click here for showtimes.

Trailer: Penguins

Teen Spirit – When Violet (Elle Fanning), a young waitress in a small town learns of a singing competition called Teen Spirit, she decides to take a chance and audition. With the help of an unlikely mentor, she manages to get much farther in the competition than she’d ever dreamed. Click here for showtimes.

Trailer: Teen Spirit

The Grizzlies – Based on the true story of high school teacher Russ Sheppard (Ben Schnetzer), who moves to the town of Kugluktuk, Nunavut, which is plagued with one of the highest rates of alcohol abuse and suicide in North America. Russ starts a lacrosse team that changes the community’s way of life forever. Opens in

Trailer: The Grizzlies

Sir – In Mumbai, young widow Ratna gets a job as a live-in maid for Ashwin, a young man from a wealthy home who is engaged to be married. Ashwin slowly begins to fall in love with Ratna, whose drive and courage make her very different from the spoiled wealthy women in his life. Opens in

Trailer: Sir

High Life – A small group of men and women with criminal pasts accept an extremely dangerous mission to deep space in order to avoid the death penalty. They are to fly into a black hole, in the hope of harnessing its energy for Earth. When things go wrong, Monte (Robert Pattinson) and his daughter Willow are the only two survivors as they hurtle toward the oblivion of the black hole. Opens in

Trailer: High Life
