Vow to take the fight to clean up India further in 2nd term: PM Modi during an exclusive chat with Times Now

Prime Minister Narendra Modi in an exclusive interview with Times Now. | Photo Credit: Times Now

In a clear message to those embroiled in corruption cases, the Prime Minister has vowed to take the fight to clean up India further in his 2nd term. In a 75-minute compelling interview to TIMES NOW Editor-In-Chief Rahul Shivshankar and Managing Editor Navika Kumar, the PM said that he had brought the corrupt like a ‘senior advocate’ for instance to the doorstep of the courts but in his second term he intended to ‘send them to jail’.

RAHUL SHIVSHANKAR, Editor In Chief: Accountability, maybe there is no accountability, which is why people become emboldened. In 2014, you had made people count the 'ABCD' of corruption, in that ABC & D, D for Damaad Shri, he is still out. Not a lot has happened in Agusta case, the chargesheet hasn't been made. So there has been no accountability, which is why I think that I am taking your thought forward, that this is why people think that in India if you do wrong things, you will get away with it.

NARENDRA MODI, Prime Minister: Nobody believes that anymore, this is your imagination. The second thing is the income tax department that carries out raids, your other question is about political vendetta. If I don't take any action, even then I am responsible. These two things do not sit together. So first it needs to be decided which side of the scale you want to be on. All these cases that are on, they are following a due legal course, we don't do anything out of political vendetta, we go by legal laws.

During our rule, did a mahamilavati Chief Minister not go to jail? Is he not sitting in jail? Even now, for some section of the media, he is a hero. But is he in jail or not? The other matter is, this Congress party, who has ruled for four generations, could they have ever fathomed that today they would be out on bail? The government doesn't decide who will be out on bail, it's the court that has given them bail, this has happened to them. You must have seen this - the man who used to be their finance minister, every second day he goes to the court to get a date, and because he has been a very big lawyer he even gets a benefit. He keeps getting a date, but the day he stops getting a date, he will also face the same fate. We have set a certain precedent but some people have asked for preventive bail, so the right to avail the law is given to every individual. They have also used the law and even the govt uses the law. But soon, the truth will come out.

NAVIKA KUMAR, Managing Editor: But people also raise questions about Mallya, Nirav Modi, Mehul Choksi - they have left the country and post-facto action is being taken against them and talks are on about extraditing them but how did they flee and how were they allowed to flee?

NARENDRA MODI, Prime Minister: They fled because they knew that such a government has come into power that their way of living - taking loans from banks on paper and then submitting the money in the banks, continuing with their games and having fun - all of it will end in Modi raj. They knew they will have to give the money back and when they knew the time has come for them to pay up, it was natural that they tried to benefit from the system and fled. But why don't you talk about this - the time that has been wasted on TV over the three people, in the one-tenth of that time, we brought back Michel mama, let's talk about that, we brought back Saxena, let's talk about that.
