Speech Analytica: Joint rally of Mayawati, Akhilesh & Mulayam Singh barely finds mention of jobs, farmers

It was for the first time since 1995 that Mulayam Singh and Mayawati shared the dais in Mainpuri. (Photo: Twitter/Samajwadi Party)

The year was 1993, the event was a joint rally between Bahujan Samaj Party (BSP) founder Kanshiram and Samajwadi Party (SP) patriarch Mulayam Singh Yadav.



The friendship that blossomed in the aftermath of Babri Masjid demolition on December 6, 1992, weathered away two years later in 1995 after SP cadres allegedly attacked the state guest house where BSP chief Mayawati was camping with her supporters in 1995.

Cut to 26 years later, and those who were once baying for each other's blood held a joint rally together in Uttar Pradesh's Mainpuri region. It was for the first time since 1995 that Mulayam Singh and Mayawati shared the dais in Mainpuri.

The reason for coming together- to defeat the ruling Bharatiya Janata Party (BJP) and the Congress in the ongoing Lok Sabha elections. Despite being focused on the task at hand, Mayawati showed respect and bonhomie with the septuagenarian Mulayam Singh Yadav by helping him on the dais.

Extending her hand, Mayawati helped Mulayam on the stage, both Akhilesh and Mulayam let him speak first. India Today did a speech analysis on what the leaders said and also what they didn't say.

Mulayam Singh Yadav said Mayawati 6 times:

Asking voters to vote for the mahagathbandhan, Mulayam Singh started by asking voters to vote for him and to give respect to Mayawati as together they form the mahagathbandhan. He took Mayawati's name 6 times. He spoke about women safety once.



Mayawati said Mulayam Singh 16 times:

In a speech that lasted 21 minutes, Mayawati took Mulayam Singh's name 16 times, highlighting the bonhomie between the two. The word Mulayam was followed by backward/OBC 13 times. Taking a jibe at PM Narendra Modi she warned the voters against falling into the false backward category ploy of the PM.

Mahagathbandhan was mentioned 10 times.

Mayawati barely mentioned jobs, Dalits, women safety:

Though she spoke about a plethora of issues, she barely touched upon issues like job crisis, Dalits and women safety. Playing to the gallery, she stuck to talking about the mahagathbandhan and talking ill about both the Congress and the BJP.

Akhilesh mentioned 'netaji' 6 times:

Talking for 10 minutes 21 seconds, referring to Mulayam Singh as netaji, Akhilesh Yadav asked the gathering to vote for him and took his name 8 times. Highlighting the importance of both the BJP and the SP coming together, he spoke about the mahagathbandhan 6 times.

Glossing over the enmity that once existed between the two regional parties, the former Uttar Pradesh CM spoke about the work done by both SP and BSP in the past.



Akhilesh told them that it was them who had built highways and developed UP and not those who ruled the country for 50 years (Congress), nor the man who calls himself as someone who comes from a backward class but doesn't belong to it (PM Narendra Modi).

Barely mentioning jobs:

Despite talking for over 10 minutes, Akhilesh barely mentioned the ballooning job crisis and the atrocities that plagued Dalits over the past three years.
