Sadhvi Pragya Thakur says 26/11 martyr Hemant Karkare died because of her 'curse'

BJP's controversial Lok Sabha candidate from Bhopal, Sadhvi Pragya Singh Thakur, said that police officer Hemant Karkare was targeted during the 26/11 Mumbai terror attacks as she had "cursed" him for torturing her.

As the BJP distanced itself from the remarks which it said were made "due to years of physical and mental torture", and the late IPS officer's colleagues berated her for insulting him, the Sadhvi apologised for the remarks.

"I felt the enemies of the country were benefitting from my statement, so I take it back and apologise for it. It was my personal pain," an aide quoted her as saying.

The apology for her "emotionally charged" remarks came at a public meeting in Berasia area, 45 km from the party's district headquarters, her aide Upma Singh said. "Pragyaji said if her remarks have hurt someone, she was sorry for it," the aide told PTI.

Addressing BJP workers in Bhopal on Thursday, the Sadhvi, accused in the Malegaon blasts case, had also claimed that Karkare "made up his mind" not to release her from custody.

"Karkare was called by the (blast) probe panel member to Mumbai. I was then in a Mumbai jail. The commission member told him that if he didn't have any proof against me, he should not unlawfully hold me in jail," she told the gathering.

"But he (Karkare) said he will do anything... bring proof from here and there, but will not release Sadhvi... This was his cunningness. It was treason... He tortured me and subjected me to harsh abuse which was unbearable. I told him he will be destroyed. A little over a month later, he was shot dead by terrorists," she said.

BJP spokesperson Nalin Kohli said, "What Pragyaji has said that would evidently be her point of view perhaps because she herself underwent investigation and torture. We salute the sacrifice of Karkareji and won't do politics over it. BJP considers him a martyr."

—With inputs from PTI

‘Karkare tortured me’

Apologises later for ‘emotionally charged’ remarks
