Judiciary under threat; Won't stoop low even to deny allegation: CJI on sexual harassment complaint

New Delhi: Chief justice of India, Ranjan Gogoi said that independence of judiciary is under a very serious threat and there is a “larger conspiracy” to destabilise the judiciary. He was speaking on the sexual harassment allegation against him lodged by a former employee of the Supreme Court.

He said that there is some bigger force behind the woman who made sexual harassment charges. But regardless of that I'll continue to function. I will sit on this chair and discharge my judicial functions without any fear, he added.

“All I would like to say is this, undoubtedly every employee is treated fairly and decently. This employee was there for a month and half. Allegations came and I didn't deem it appropriate to reply to the allegations. This lady has a criminal background. There are two FIRs against her. How did she enter supreme court service when there was criminal case pending? I had inquired with Delhi Police. Two criminal cases are pending against the husband. She was arrested in connection with certain FIRs. State has filed cancellation of bail and is in consideration of Patiala House court today”.

“After 20 years of selfless service. It is unbelievable ...With a bank balance of 6,80,000 that is in my bank account. This is my total asset. When I started as a judge, I have much hope. On the verge of retirement, I have 6 lakhs. I don't think that this can be of a plot of junior assistant. There is a bigger plot. They want to deactivate the office of CJI. This is the reward CJI gets after 20 years , a bank balance of 680,000. This I thought should be told from highest seat of judiciary. Independence of judiciary is under very very serious threat. If the judges have to work under these conditions, good people will never come to this office.”

Earlier the day, a three Judge Bench was constituted for a special siting today to deal with the matter citing 'great public importance touching upon the independence of judiciary'.

A special bench consisting of Chief Justice of India Ranjan Gogoi, Justice Arun Mishra and Justice Sanjiv Khanna was convened.

The bench said that ‘we are not passing any judicial order but leaving it to media to act responsible to ensure that independence of judiciary it protected’.

An appropriate Bench will hear the sexual harassment allegations against CJI, said supreme court.
