BJP’s anti Muslim posturing out in open: NC

Srinagar

Jammu and Kashmir National Conference on Saturday condemned the recent statement of a BJP functionary wherein he had outrageously asked voters to cast their ballot in favor of PM Modi if they want to destroy Muslims, saying that such horrible assertion is reflective of BJP’s aversion for Muslims.

In a statement issued from party headquarters Nawa-e-Subah, party’s provincial spokesperson Imran Nabi Dar while condemning the BJP statement said that what is alarming here is the fact that PM Modi, cabinet ministers and BJP functionaries haven’t censured the person for his hateful statement against Muslims. “We are hearing this kind of intimidation in broad daylight by a BJP functionary addressing a public gathering in Barabanki, Uttar Pradesh. The person had sordidly vowed to destroy the breed of Muslims and not just that, he has said that the party will bring machines from China to shave Muslims and convert them to Hinduism. Why is PM mute on this issue? This does not behoove his political denomination.”

Imran said that having been failed to deliver on the promises made by it, BJP is again resorting to hate mongering and fanning of communal passions. “Such distasteful communal election time rhetoric is tailored to fan communal passions and polarize the people in the run-up to elections. The sheer naïve attitude of PM and other high rung leaders of BJP over this issue reveal that divisiveness and polarization is the social and the accepted policy within BJP. Every sane voice in India should come forward and dismiss this sort of campaign rhetoric. However, this should act as an eye opener to the people of the country while they make their choices for the kind of government they want to have for the next five years. We have had enough of this. Our party too is spearheading the campaign against such divisive agenda of BJP and its cronies in our state with the active support of people.”

Imran said that it is not just hateful rhetoric mongering that is on rising now, “We are seeing how barefacedly the BJP is giving a mandate to such people as have been involved in various communal activities. All this explicitly reveals the fact of how exceedingly communal BJP is to its core. People of the country are affront with this kind of filthy politics, the country is beseeching for change. We in our state are fighting BJP and its cronies. So far, people have rejected BJP and its cronies in Baramulla and Srinagar parliamentary polls; the people of Anantnag are also all set to trounce their divisive agenda as well.”

Imran said that PM has nothing to answer on the promises he made during his 2014 election campaign. “People have been deceived by BJP, they want answers from them. People want to know what happened to the promise of 2 crore jobs and a sleuth of promises made by PM Modi in his campaign. People across the country have taken it upon themselves to show them the door. We in our state have been the worst sufferers of BJPs anti-Muslim disposition.”
