Facing threat from Jaish, IAF deploys Abhinandan Varthaman outside Srinagar

Abhinandan Varthaman will be undergoing medical tests before getting deployed to his new place of posting | File photo from ANI

The Indian Air Force (IAF) issued a transfer order for Wing Commander Abhinandan Varthaman on Saturday.

Wing Commander Abhinandan Varthaman will be deployed outside Srinagar now. Abhinandan Varthaman will be shifted from Srinagar to a peace station.

The transfer came after the IAF assessed a security threat to Wing Commander Abhinandan Varthaman's life.

Abhinandan Varthaman is currently posted at an important airbase in the western sector of Srinagar. The posting orders for the IAF pilot, who was held captive by Pakistan and later released, have been issued and he is getting posted out from Srinagar, the sources in the Air Force said.

He will be undergoing medical tests before getting deployed to his new place of posting, the sources said.

Indian Air Force transfers Wing Commander Abhinandan Varthaman out of the Srinagar airbase amid concerns over his security in Kashmir valley. Officer posted to an important airbase in the Western sector. (File pic) pic.twitter.com/RWnlPfR4jV ANI (@ANI) April 20, 2019

ABHINANDAN AND JEM

The IAF pilot is facing a threat from terror organisation Jaish-e-Mohammed (JeM) which has been trying to attack Indian military locations and personnel.

ABHINANDAN AND PAKISTAN

Wing Commander Abhinandan Varthaman became a national hero when he was captured by the Pakistan Army on February 27, 2019, after his MiG-21 Bison jet was shot down in a dogfight with Pakistani jets.

Abhinandan Varthaman downed an F-16 fighter of Pakistan before his plane was hit.

Abhinandan Varthaman was released on the night of March 1, 2019, by Pakistan.

After he was captured, Abhinandan Varthaman showed courage and grace in handling the most difficult circumstances for which he was praised by politicians, strategic affairs experts, ex-servicemen, celebrities and people in general.

When he returned, Abhinandan Varthaman was sent on a four-week leave. Even during the period of his sick leave, he preferred to stay with his squadron in Srinagar than going home to his family in Chennai, Tamil Nadu.

At the moment, he is awaiting a series of medical tests which will determine if he can get back to flying fighter jets.
