Mamata lashes out at Modi for ‘spreading lies’ about Bengal

Bogula/Panighata (Nad-ia): Chief minister Mamata Banerjee on Saturday blast-ed Prime Minister Narendra Modi for “spreading lies” about her government’s performance, asking him to “crosscheck facts”.“What I expect from a PM is that he would crosscheck facts before making an accusation. This PM is saying wh-at he hears from a small-time BJP leader,” she said, asking Modi to first say what he has done for the last five years.“This is a central electi-on. BJP is daring us, saying Mamata Banerjee has not done anything. I am daring them back. Tell me what Modi has done for five years,” she said, citing atrocities on Adivasis, Dalits and minorities in the last five years. “This is not all. They are trying to introduce National Register of Citizens in Bengal. As many as 22 lakh Bengalis will be derecognised in the process in Assam,” she said in Nadia district that has a considerable presence of Hindus from Bangladesh.Banerjee cited rising un-employment and intolerance to take a dig at the Modi government. “They never kept their promise of 10 crore jobs in five years. On the other hand, 2 crore people lost jobs and the promise of Rs 15 lakh per person, too, was not kept. Narendra Modi is imposing his will on the people and saying every day that those who don’t like BJP are anti-nationals. He is telling lies every day,” she said.The CM said BJP was desperate for seats in Bengal as its leaders had realized the party wasn’t going to win this time. “BJP is going to lose badly across the country. That’s why they are trying to create trouble in Bengal, thinking they can get a foothold by pitting one against the other. They are trying to instigate riots by polarising people on religious lines.”The Trinamool chief warned people against the import of militant Hinduism by BJP, saying it was different from the inclusive Hindu religion she grew up with. “They have never worked with any of our great leaders of the Independence movement. They only know to preach their own insular version of Hinduism. I too believe in Hinduism and worship its gods and goddesses, but I also pray with Muslims, with Christians and with people of all religions.”The CM also took on Modi over the Citizenship (Am-endment) Bill, asking: “Who is BJP to give us citizenship when we are already citizens?“ Banerjee later led a roadshow at Krishnanagar.
