More residents to boycott polls over pathetic roads

Ludhiana: After residents of Ward 28 announced a boycott of the general elections, the ladies of Daljit Nagar and New Aggar Nagar from Ward 74 have opened a new front against Congress councillor Pankaj Sharma for not constructing roads in the area. The ladies in the area gathered on Saturday morning and staged a protest against the pathetic condition of the roads for a long time. They gave an ultimatum to the councillor to start construction of the roads by April-end, failing which they would boycott Congress in the elections.

Welfare Association of Daljit Nagar president Prabhjot Kaur said the Congress councillor had promised to get the roads constructed in the locality, so they believed him and voted in his favour, but unfortunately, the roads are still in a pathetic condition. She warned the councillor to fulfil his promise, otherwise they were not going to vote in favour of a Congress candidate.

The residents rued that the area was developed around 22 years ago, and for the past almost one year, they were being told that the raods would be constructed, but so far, nothing has been done. They said when they met the councillor in this regard around a month ago, he had assured them that the road work would take place in a day or so. They also met councillor Pankaj Sharma in his office regarding the issue, who asked them to wait until April 28.

Sharma said the work was approved under Punjab Infrastructure Development Board (PIDB), but due to certain issues, it was getting delayed, and the contractor was spoiling the plan. He said in his ward (74), he had got 32km-long roads constructed, which had never happened in any other ward. He assured the women that the work in their areas of the same ward would also start by April-end. Residents are irritated by the fact that in adjoining areas, work was being done, but their area was left out.

Notably, on Friday, residents of Dhandhari in Ward 28 had also threatened to boycott the general elections and showed resentment against the pathetic condition of civic amenities in their ward.



Facebook Twitter Linkedin EMail
