To fulfill your dreams I can sacrifice mine: PM Modi in Rajasthan's Barmer

New Delhi :

Prime Minister Narendra Modi is scheduled to address a bunch of rallies in Rajasthan and Gujarat as campaigning for the third phase of Lok Sabha elections 2019 ends today. Modi will hold public meetings in Chittorgarh and Barmer in Rajasthan. He will also address a gathering in his home state Gujarat’s Patan and seek votes for the BJP candidate. Besides Modi, BJP president Amit Shah is also scheduled to hold a road show in Gujarat’s Sanand. On the other hand, BSP chief Mayawati will be in Jharkhand’s Chatra to campaign for the party’s candidate Nageshwar Ganjhu. The third phase of Lok Sabha elections will be held across 116 parliamentary constituencies on April 23.

Below are the Live Updates on Lok Sabha elections 2019:

22:32 (IST) Facebook Twitter Whats app Linked In Madhya Pradesh: BJP MP candidate from Indore, Shankar Lalwani meets sitting MP from Indore Sumitra Mahajan at her residence.

21:40 (IST) Facebook Twitter Whats app Linked In Congress releases list of 5 candidates for Lok Sabha elections in Haryana; Bhupinder Singh Hooda to contest from Sonipat, Nirmal Singh from Kurukshetra, Bhavya Bishnoi from Hisar, Kuldeep Sharma from Karnal and Avtar Singh Bhadana (in place of Lalit Nagar) from Faridabad

21:25 (IST) Facebook Twitter Whats app Linked In I went to Puri, Cuttack and now Kendrapada, in Odisha. All 3 are prestigious battles, where we are winning with huge margins. We want development in eastern part & as Modi ji said that east has to develop as much as south and west: Piyush Goyal

19:18 (IST) Facebook Twitter Whats app Linked In I think the PM Modi has declared that they want to make a “dent” in the east (in these Lok Sabha elections) but he would not be able to do so in Odisha: Naveen Patnaik

18:13 (IST) Facebook Twitter Whats app Linked In From years there was a demand for a war memorial, but the Congress built memorials only for its family members

18:11 (IST) Facebook Twitter Whats app Linked In Congress government missed opportunity to resolve Kashmir issue in 1971 by releasing 90000 Pakistani soldiers who surrendered: PM Modi in Barmer rally.

18:09 (IST) Facebook Twitter Whats app Linked In Congress, which was involved in dividing the society, never took note of the reservation for poor: PM Modi

18:09 (IST) Facebook Twitter Whats app Linked In To fulfill your dreams I can sacrifice mine: PM Modi

18:07 (IST) Facebook Twitter Whats app Linked In Today India destroyed terrorist camp inside Pakistan's territory that too without any war... This is an example of powerful government, says PM Modi

18:01 (IST) Facebook Twitter Whats app Linked In Congress says that terrorism and nationalism are not issues at all: PM

18:01 (IST) Facebook Twitter Whats app Linked In Pakistan always says that they have nuclear button; then what do we have? We also have and it is not for Diwali: PM

17:53 (IST) Facebook Twitter Whats app Linked In For forty years, our ex-servicemen demanded One Rank One Pension...But what the previous Congress-led UPA government did? Just before the elections, they allocated merely Rs. 500 crores...When we assumed office, we ensured our ex-servicemen got the OROP: PM in Rajasthan's Barmer.

15:51 (IST) Facebook Twitter Whats app Linked In Priyanka Gandhi Vadra on being asked if she will be contesting from Varanasi: If Congress president asks me to contest, I will be happy to contest.



Priyanka Gandhi Vadra on being asked if she will be contesting from Varanasi: If Congress President asks me to contest, I will be happy to contest. #LokSabhaElections2019 pic.twitter.com/rbMagjccOF

— ANI (@ANI) April 21, 2019



15:40 (IST) Facebook Twitter Whats app Linked In Congress has three realities 'naamdaar parivar', corruption and plenty of false promises, says PM Modi.

15:39 (IST) Facebook Twitter Whats app Linked In We will make 'Jal Shakti' Ministry to resolve water crisis in country: PM Modi in Chittorgarh.

15:39 (IST) Facebook Twitter Whats app Linked In PM Narendra Modi in Chittorgarh, Rajasthan, says, "India stands with the citizens of Sri Lanka, in such a crisis India will do whatever it can to help Sri Lanka".



#WATCH: PM Narendra Modi in Chittorgarh,Rajasthan, says, "India stands with the citizens of Sri Lanka, in such a crisis India will do whatever it can to help Sri Lanka." #SriLankaBlasts pic.twitter.com/T2eHlxFpGK

— ANI (@ANI) April 21, 2019



13:05 (IST) Facebook Twitter Whats app Linked In Lt General(Retd) DS Hooda on Pragya Thakur's remark on late Hemant Karkare: Yes it does hurt when such things are said about a martyr, be it from the Army or the Police, full respect should be given. These utterances are not good.

12:07 (IST) Facebook Twitter Whats app Linked In Aam Aadmi Party declares candidates for 3 seats in Haryana- Naveen Jaihind from Faridabad,Prithviraj from Ambala and Krishan Kumar Agarwal from Karnal.

12:06 (IST) Facebook Twitter Whats app Linked In PM Narendra Modi in Patan,Gujarat: When Abhinandan was captured by Pakistan, I said(to Pakistan) that If anything happens to our pilot then we will not leave you.



PM Narendra Modi in Patan,Gujarat: When #Abhinandan was captured by Pakistan, I said(to Pakistan) that If anything happens to our pilot then we will not leave you pic.twitter.com/0Vlcb7I1A6

— ANI (@ANI) April 21, 2019



11:52 (IST) Facebook Twitter Whats app Linked In Chhattisgarh CM Bhupesh Baghel says,'...Pragya Thakur aadatan apradhi jaisa unka vyahwar raha hai, 19 saal pehle yahan chakubaazi ki thi, maar-peet ki thi, thodi-thodi baaton pe jhagda karti thi, to jhagdalu pravarti ki shuru se rahi hai.'



#WATCH: Chhattisgarh CM Bhupesh Baghel says,'...Pragya Thakur aadatan apradhi jaisa unka vyahwar raha hai, 19 saal pehle yahan chakubaazi ki thi, maar-peet ki thi, thodi-thodi baaton pe jhagda karti thi, to jhagdalu pravarti ki shuru se rahi hai.' pic.twitter.com/A7bJ4mUgb4

— ANI (@ANI) April 21, 2019



11:29 (IST) Facebook Twitter Whats app Linked In Bhopal District Election Officer issued a notice to BJP candidate Pragya Singh Thakur & sought explanation within a day, for her remarks, 'I had demolished the structure (in Ayodhya). I will go there & help in the construction of Ram temple.'

11:13 (IST) Facebook Twitter Whats app Linked In Supporters of Senior Delhi Congress leader Raj Kumar Chauhan protest outside Rahul Gandhi's residence alleging that Chauhan is being denied a Lok Sabha ticket.



Supporters of Senior Delhi Congress leader Raj Kumar Chauhan protest outside Rahul Gandhi's residence alleging that Chauhan is being denied a Lok Sabha ticket pic.twitter.com/qXDg5AYAO4

— ANI (@ANI) April 21, 2019



10:41 (IST) Facebook Twitter Whats app Linked In Pragya Singh Thakur, BJP's Bhopal candidate: Yes, I had gone there (Ayodhya), I had said it y'day too, not denying it. I had demolished the structure. I will go there & help in the construction of Ram temple, nobody can stop us from doing that, Ram rashtra hain, rashtra Ram hain.

08:49 (IST) Facebook Twitter Whats app Linked In Hardik Patel alleges threat to life, asks for police security after being attacked during a rally in Gujarat.

08:41 (IST) Facebook Twitter Whats app Linked In FIR registered against Congress candidate from South Mumbai Milind Deora under section 171 of IPC ( giving false statements for elections) and section 125 of the presentation of people's act ( promoting enmity between classes in connection with elections).

08:10 (IST) Facebook Twitter Whats app Linked In Congress party is likely to announce the name of its candidates for the seven Lok Sabha seats in Delhi in a couple of days: Sheila Dikshit, Delhi Pradesh Congress Committee chief

08:01 (IST) Facebook Twitter Whats app Linked In Chhattisgarh Chief Minister Bhupesh Baghel: She (Pragya Singh Thakur) has filed her nomination against Congress leader Digvijaya Singh.The BJP did not have any other candidate so it has fielded a 'gunda mavali' (goon) who had indulged in spreading terror.

07:59 (IST) Facebook Twitter Whats app Linked In Piyush Goyal calls Priyanka Gandhi's weak PM remarks against Modi a joke.



P Goyal on Priyanka Gandhi Vadra remark,‘Never seen a weaker PM than Modi’: That's the joke of the day. It's PM Modi’s courage that to destroy enemies from the very roots, we crossed LoC&attacked them in Balakot. Because of this,Pakistan is afraid today&entire world is with India pic.twitter.com/cjGzg7tHdF

— ANI (@ANI) April 20, 2019



07:58 (IST) Facebook Twitter Whats app Linked In "BJP cannot escape its responsibility by saying that the remarks of Pragya Singh Thakur are her personal. Modi's declaration of his fight against terrorism has no meaning when he nominates terrora ccused as BJP candidate in Bhopal," the Communist Party of India said in a statement.

07:56 (IST) Facebook Twitter Whats app Linked In Row over terror accused BJP candidate Pragya Singh Thakur's insulting remarks against 26/11 hero Hemant Karkare intensifies futher with CPI condemning her remarks and the BJP for fielding her in Lok Sabha polls from Bhopal.

07:53 (IST) Facebook Twitter Whats app Linked In Union Minister Piyush Goyal takes a dig at Rahul Gandhi over his Wayanad pick: When Smriti Irani is contesting against Rahul Gandhi in Amethi,he has run away to Wayanad. In Amethi, Smriti ji will defeat him&in Wayanad also,he'll be defeated. I think in next polls, he'll have to go to a neighboring country and search for a seat.
