Pre-monsoon showers likely over interior parts in TN, cloudy weather over Chennai

Pre-monsoon showers likely over interior parts in TN, cloudy weather over Chennai

According to a bulletin issued by the Regional Met Department, thunderstorm and heavy rainfall likely to occur over isolated places in the state.

news Weather

For the next few days, Tamil Nadu can expect a brief respite from the scorching summer heat as the Regional Meteorological Centre has predicted light to moderate rains over a few places in the state for the next four days until April 24. A bulletin from the centre issued at 10 pm on Saturday stated that the trend is likely to be experienced in Puducherry as well.

Thunderstorm with gusty winds of 40-50 kmph along with lightning in isolated places over the state has also been forecast for the next three days until April 23.

The bulletin has also issued heavy rainfall warning on Monday at places like Theni, Thirunelveli, Dindigul and Salem districts. As far as Chennai is concerned, it is likely to be partly cloudy with maximum and minimum temperatures likely to be around 36 and 29 degree Celsius respectively.

The onset of pre-monsoon rainfall in certain areas in the state has been a welcome change for its people. Namakkal Automatic Weather Station (AWS) recorded the highest total of 9 cm rainfall in the state so far on Saturday followed by Kodaikanal at 7 cm and Paramathivelur in Namakkal District at 4 cm.

Popular weather blogger from the state Pradeep John took to Facebook to chart the rainfall amounts recorded in different parts of the state on April 17, 18 and 19. The highest was seen at Rajapalayam, Virudhungar district that clocked 120 mm rainfall.

While the showers seem like a much-needed relief, between March 1 and April 20 the state has recorded an 82 per cent rainfall deficit.

The bulletin from Regional Met has also issued high-temperature warnings for Tiruvallur, Coimbatore, Tirunelveli, Kancheepuram, Vellore, Thiruvannamalai, Dharmapuri, Salem, Namakkal, Karur, Tiruchirapalli, Perambalur, Tiruppur, Dindigul and Madurai districts. They are set to experience maximum temperature that will likely be above normal by 2-3 degree Celsius.
