‘Every problem in India has roots in Congress policies’: The Pinarayi Vijayan interview

‘Every problem in India has roots in Congress policies’: The Pinarayi Vijayan interview

Kerala Chief Minister Pinarayi Vijayan spoke about the Sabarimala issue, Rahul Gandhi's candidature from Wayanad, Hindutva politics and more.

news Lok Sabha 2019

While the national political narrative is set to Modi and his adversaries, the battle on the ground in Kerala is a bit more complex. The ruling CPI(M) is taking on both the Congress and BJP with equal gusto, even if they make it clear that communalism is their primary enemy and defeating BJP their focus. In an interview to The News Minute's Saritha S Balan, Kerala Chief Minister Pinarayi Vijayan spoke about the Sabarimala issue, Rahul Gandhi's candidature from Wayanad, Hindutva politics and more.

Q. This is perhaps for the first time that religion, Hinduism, things like 'Hindus under threat,' are being discussed in a Kerala election. What has changed? Other than political parties like the BJP raking it up, has a population of Keralites also started gravitating to this kind of thought?

A. Such slogans have been raised by the Sangh in the past too. However, Kerala society with a strong secular ethos has always shamed it and will continue to do so. The observation that you’ve made - ‘BJP raking it up' - is absolutely spot on. They’re desperately trying the same tactics that they’ve tried everywhere else in the country. Ultimately, the reality is that they’re resorting to rabid communalism because they have no achievements to showcase for their last 5 years in government; absolutely none what so ever.

Q. All over the country, we have witnessed people moving towards these concepts of Hindutva and bringing Hindus under one umbrella. Judging the reactions to Sabarimala verdict where thousands protested, do you still believe Keralites will continue to break away from this trend?

A. As I mentioned, Kerala’s society is deep-rooted in the secular ethos. No matter how hard one may try, it cannot be undone; because the people of Kerala are well aware that it is this secular mindset that has paved the way for our progress which has helped us to make a global imprint.

Q. Prime Minister Narendra Modi has said that your government is corrupt, publicly said that you are accused in the Lavalin case?

A. What the Prime Minister said is untrue, unfounded and baseless. When his own office, government and party are under the scanner for massive corruption, he is accusing someone who has been exonerated by both the trial court and the High Court.

Let me advise him to think whether it is fair on his part to make such comments. Is it not unbecoming of a person who holds the office of Prime Minister? It is to be noted that the person who levels this allegation himself is in the dock following the exposure of the Rafale deal. He owes an explanation to the nation as to what his role in this deal is.

Q. Political violence of the CPI (M) has been highlighted by the BJP, with Modi launching a scathing attack with his speeches. Even for Congress, that is one of the prime campaign issues, especially in the northern districts. Why has the party not been able to put an end to violence?

A. It is the RSS and the BJP that have always initiated political violence in our midst; not just in Kerala, but in the entire country. We all know who all were behind the murder of Mahatma Gandhi, the father of our nation.

As far as the Congress and the BJP go, we should not forget that they have not even apologised for the genocides in 1984 and 2002, which the Indian society as a whole holds them responsible for. Even the British have expressed regret over the Jallianwala Bagh massacre. Are they thinking that there is still a long way to go for the 100th anniversary of their excesses against humanity?

In Kerala alone, 209 members and leaders of the CPI(M) have lost their lives to the swords wielded by the RSS/BJP combine. Even small children have been killed in Kerala by the Sangh for refusing to associate with them. And the Congress, who claims to be the wholesale distributor of peace, has not only murdered Left workers in the past, including elected representatives; even their own workers and leaders belonging to rival groups have been finished off by them.

However, this government has taken major efforts at curbing political violence in the state; the official records speak for themselves. No perpetrators of violence have been allowed to go scot-free without having to bear its consequences.

Q. The entry of young women into Sabarimala still remains as the most sensitive issue in the elections, both the BJP and the Congress have smartly made use of it by projecting that the Left is against faith and beliefs? Should the CPI(M) be held responsible if the BJP makes a gain out of it? In retrospect, do you think that you could have been more tactical in dealing with the Sabarimala issue?

A. The CPI(M) has had no role to play in this entire episode. The party has always maintained that faith is a personal affair in which it will not interfere. It hasn't tried to take people to Sabarimala or prevent people from going there. At the same time, the Government of Kerala has only stood by the laws of this country and adhered to our Constitution, as directed by the honourable Supreme Court.

Ever since women's entry was restricted at Sabarimala through an order of the Kerala High Court, it was the tallest leaders of the Sangh - both at the national level and the state level - that called for women's entry there. Even while the court proceedings were progressing, such demands were reiterated by them. Once the SC verdict was announced, it was welcomed as a historical one by both the Sangh and the Congress.

The same people later went ahead and cried foul, not because of anything the CPI(M) or the state government did, but because of what the court said. How is the party or the government to be blamed for their political game?

Q. The Left is powerful only in Kerala and it is not even sure whether the party’s gain will be in double digits. What is the relevance of the Left in national politics?

A. Have you not seen the power of the Left in the farmlands of Maharashtra and Rajasthan? Or, in the campuses across the country? Or, when ASHA, Anganwadi and scheme workers came together? Or, in trade union protests in which banking, railways, transportation and even the IT sector were affected? Or, against caste atrocities in Tamil Nadu, Karnataka and other states? Or, in the assemblies of Himachal Pradesh, Jammu & Kashmir and so on?

If you objectively look at the last 5 years, you will see that it was the Left that led the fight against the anti-people policies and vicious communalisation imposed upon Indian society by the current RSS-run central government. That is precisely the role of the Left in national politics, to take up issues that directly affect the lives of millions of Indians, which no other political party will dare to touch.

I am sure you remember that when journalists - including yourself - were attacked by goons, it was the Left, and not the Congress or the BJP that stood for the rights and security of Indian media.

Q. How do you react to the Congress’s anticipation that Rahul's candidature from Wayanad will help them sweep Kerala? Rahul has said he will not say a word against the Left. How do you react to that?

A. I have maintained all along that he is only one among the 20 UDF candidates in Kerala. You will see that he has had no effect; let the results come. He is contesting against the Left, actions speak louder than words.

Q. Since the larger unity of opposition parties does not seem to be a practical task without the Congress, could you make your stand clear on whether the Left would eventually back the Congress?

A. It still remains to be seen if they will have any serious role to play in the national secular alternative being championed on the basis of regional alliances.

Q. The opinion polls by prominent media houses have predicted a poll debacle for the Left and even that BJP will win two seats. The prediction that BJP will win in Thiruvananthapuram, do you believe that is plausible? Will this make Left supporters vote for the Congress there to prevent BJP’s victory?

A. All surveys have thrown up varying figures. It surely seems like there is a concentrated effort to create an atmosphere favourable for some. I’m sure you are aware of how such surveys did during the '99, '04 and '09 elections. I’ve travelled throughout the state, there is rising popular support in favour of the Left. The enlightened people of Kerala will ensure the total debacle of BJP in the state.

Congress leaders continue to flock to the BJP, even as the election process is progressing. How can they be trusted?

It was the Congress that signed on free trade agreements that wreaked havoc in India's agriculture. They were the ones who cut down on the subsidies for agriculture. They also deregulated petroleum prices resulting in spiralling prices. They were the ones who weakened the NREGS, which was proposed by the Left.

By fudging the numbers, Congress made many rise above the poverty line and thus denied them their legitimate welfare measures. They even invaded the privacy of Indian citizens by implementing Aadhaar.

Congress was the first to allow FDI in various sectors. They were the ones who initiated the process of privatising the public sector.

GST, which ate into the financial rights of the states, was an idea mooted by the Congress. The process of meddling with state governments and toppling democratically elected state governments was also initiated by the Congress. They also began to meddle with the CBI and used it as a political tool.

Neoliberal policies were introduced by the Congress. Giving huge tax rebates to corporates was Congress's idea. A big corporate house called the Congress 'apna dukan'.

Every time they came to power, the Congress engaged in large scale corruption. Even when they were in power, they did nothing to stop the hoarding of black money in offshore havens.

It was the Congress that allowed those who were behind the death of hundreds of Indians to escape the country (Bhopal Gas Tragedy, Warren Anderson). It was the Congress that allowed for the witch hunt of minorities at one point of time (Anti Sikh Riots).

Congress started mixing politics with religion. BJP perfected it. Congress introduced neoliberal reforms. BJP went ahead with it. Every problem that is ailing Indian society today has its roots in the policies introduced by the Congress. How can they be an alternative to the BJP?

Q. The party highlighted the Renaissance to counter opposition for allowing young women to offer prayers at Sabarimala temple. But during election campaigns, it has not been highlighted much. Also, the LDF has fielded only two women candidates?

A. This general election is for the Indian Parliament, the issues to be discussed are the prevalent national situation, the performance of the incumbent government and the way forward for the country. We are doing exactly that in our campaigns. It goes without saying that we stand for the values of renaissance, including women's empowerment. In every respect, it gets reflected in our campaign.

Q. The LDF has been accused of having double standards when it comes to matters of other religions, like the Church Act that was kept on the back burner?

A. This is an accusation deliberately brought in to defame the LDF and its government, against the backdrop of Sabarimala episode. There is no parallel between the two. The fact remains that the government is not interfering in the internal matters of any religion.

Q. Will the poll result be an assessment of the Left government’s rule in the state?

A. Thus far, Kerala has made giant strides in development and undertaken radical steps to ensure social justice under the LDF government. However, that is not the focal point; the focus is on defeating the BJP and ensuring the formation of a secular government at the centre which presents an alternative.
