Have we kept our bombs for Diwali: PM Narendra Modi on nuclear threats from Pakistan

Barmer: Prime Minister Narendra Modi on Sunday said that India is no longer worried about threats of Pakistan using its nuclear bombs against the country and said that the armed forces are fully equipped and prepared to meet any eventuality.

In a stern reminder to Pakistan, the PM said that today India is among the world powers with the capability to carry out nuclear attacks across the land, water, and air.

"The NDA government has instilled fear in the minds and hearts of terrorists. We hit terrorists getting right into their homes. Now India is no more afraid of Pakistan threats," the PM said while addressing a poll rally here.

''India has stopped the policy of getting scared of Pakistan's threats. Every other day they used to say 'we have a nuclear button, we have a nuclear button'.....What do we have then? Have we kept it for Diwali?'' the PM asked while addressing a huge gathering of supporters in Rajasthan's Barmer.

#WATCH Prime Minister Narendra Modi in Barmer, Rajasthan: India has stopped the policy of getting scared of Pakistan's threats. Every other day they used to say "We've nuclear button, we've nuclear button".....What do we have then? Have we kept it for Diwali? pic.twitter.com/cgSLoO8nma — ANI (@ANI) April 21, 2019

Attacking the Congress-led Opposition, the PM said, "We forced Pakistan to beg around the world. You think that I did what was right, but Congress and its allies think it was not right.''

"They think terrorism and national security is just not the issue to discuss. They think that Modi should not talk of Indian honour and valour. Why? Am I here to attend a Bhajan Mandali (hymn singing session)?" the PM said.

Citing his government`s record on terrorism, particularly the Balakot airstrikes following the Pulwama attack on February 14 that left at least 40 CRPF men dead, PM Modi mocked the opposition`s response.

"We went into their (terrorists`) homes to attack them and they (Congress) are asking for proof. As we the hit terrorists, pains were felt in their hearts," the PM quipped.

Hailing the armed forces for their selfless service to the nation, the PM recalled the 1971 War during which the Indian forces captured a large part of the Pakistani territory.

''In 1971, due to the bravery of our soldiers, a big part of Pakistan came in our possession. Around 90,000 Pakistani soldiers were in our custody but what did we do in Shimla? Government squandered everything that our jawans had won.....what if Modi was there then?'' the PM asked again.

#WATCH PM Modi in Barmer, Rajasthan: In 1971 due to bravery of our soldiers a big part of Pak came in our possession, 90,000 Pakistani soldiers were in our custody but what did we do in Shimla? Govt squandered everything that our jawans had won.....what if Modi was there then? pic.twitter.com/zo1SJ8KDl2 — ANI (@ANI) April 21, 2019

Attacking the Congress party, the PM said, ''The then Congress government missed a big opportunity to resolve Kashmir issue in 1971 by releasing the Pakistani soldiers and returning the land acquired by the Indian forces.''

The PM also accused the Congress of indulging in the AgustaWestland VVIP helicopter scam.

"With Michael mama (alleged middleman Christian Michael), they looted honest people"s income. However, as you had elected a `mazboot` government, we contacted France for Rafale (fighter jets), leaving aside Congress agents. These aircraft will soon be seen in Indian skies," he said.

Addressing an election rally in Rajasthan's Chittorgarh earlier on Sunday, hours after a series of blasts rocked Sri Lanka on Easter Sunday, PM Modi said, "India is standing by Sri Lanka and is ready for any help in the time of crisis."

Expressing concern over the menace of terrorism, he said, "When you go to vote and press the 'Lotus' (BJP's poll symbol) button...Keep it in mind that you are pressing that button to eliminate terrorism. Your finger has that power. Pressing the 'lotus' button will strengthen my resolve to fight against terrorism."

At the same rally, PM Modi accused the Congress party of betraying the people, saying injustice was done to the country's growth potential and its resources.

''Do you want strong India or helpless India? Do you want Congress government that makes country weak or BJP that makes country strong,'' the PM asked the gathering.

PM in Chittorgarh, Rajasthan: Do you want to see an India that gives reply to Pak or one that bows down to them? An India that gives a strong reply to terrorists or an India that stays mum after terrorist attacks? A Congress that weakens the country or a BJP that strengthens it? pic.twitter.com/2dzc58se95 — ANI (@ANI) April 21, 2019

The PM concluded by saying that ''people have faith that Modi cannot tolerate an attack on the country, can also risk his political future for the sake of the nation.''

During a rally in Gujarat's Patan, the PM had said that he had warned Pakistan of serious consequences if it did not return Indian Air Force pilot Abhinandan Varthaman.

PM Modi, who has been touring the length and breadth of the country while campaigning for his party, had come to Rajasthan on Sunday to address rallies in Chittorgarh and Barmer.

According to BJP state tour program convener Omkar Singh Lakhawat, the Prime Minister will address rallies in Udaipur and Jodhpur on Monday.

Union Home Minister Rajnath Singh, too, will address three public meetings on Monday in Kolayat of Bikaner, Deoli of Tonk and Shahajahapur of Alwar.

BJP chief Amit Shah will tour the state on April 26 and 30. He will address a public meeting in Jalore district on 26 April and then take part in a road show in Jodhpur same day.

(With Agency inputs)
