My warning forced Pakistan to free Wing Commander Abhinandan: Narendra Modi

Prime Minister raises Balakot air strike in Gujarat campaign.

Prime Minister Narendra Modi said on Sunday that he had warned Pakistan of “dire consequences” if the pilot (Wing Commander Abhinandan) was not freed immediately during the post-Balakot skirmishes with the neighbouring country in February.

Addressing a rally at Patan in Gujarat, Mr. Modi brought up the Pulwama terror attack, saying India’s fitting response to it with an air strike on a terror camp in Balakot made Pakistan go begging across the world.

“You know that U.S. President has said Modi would do something big. Another U.S. person said Modi had kept 12 missiles ready if Abhinandan was not released by Pakistan and the situation would have worsened. Yes, it was qatal ki raat,” he said, talking about the post-Balakot situation, when Pakistan had taken an Indian fighter pilot captive after he landed in Pakistan.

Also Read BJP Minister admits party using Balakot air strikes to seek votes

“Your Modi will not hesitate to go to any extent to protect the country and you,” he said in his last rally in his home State that goes to the polls on April 23.

Emotional appeal

The Prime Minister also made an emotional appeal to the people of Gujarat, invoking the son-of-the soil sentiment, while exhorting them to ensure the party’s victory in all 26 seats in the State.

“My government will come back to power for sure, but if Gujarat doesn’t give 26 seats to the BJP, the TV discussions on May 23 will be why Modi lost seats in his home State,” the PM said, adding the country had already made up its mind about the BJP’s victory.

He also talked about the achievements of the NDA government and how Gujarat benefited having BJP governments at the State and the Centre.

According to him, the party had asked him to focus his energies on the entire nation and not come to Gujarat, where the people of the State will take care of the party. “but I have come here so that I can meet you all,” he said.

He had come to seek “the blessings of the elders like we do on important occasions. Bestow such blessings on me that the country does not get an opportunity to taunt me and you later if BJP loses even a single seat in the State.”

In 2014, the BJP won all the 26 Lok Sabha seats in Gujarat when Mr. Modi was the Chief Minister.

He also recalled how his government had got the famous Rani ki Vaav of Patan (step-well) printed on currency notes after it was declared a world heritage site.

“There was no need for anyone to give the memorandum to the PM. It happened because your son was at the Centre,” he said.
