‘Bed of roses’ to ‘vegetarian rallies’, lesser-known party candidates make their presence felt

81 people, including Independents, filed nominations for the Lok Sabha election; many talk about major parties and their failures

A candidate who wants to lay a bed of roses at India Gate and another who says sadhus in the country are not being investigated fairly are among a few nominees from lesser-known parties who have thrown their hats in the ring for the election in Delhi this year

Among the nominations filed for the seven Lok Sabha seats here, so far, 81 people are either fighting as Independents or representing lesser-known parties.

These include parties like the Jammu and Kashmir National Panthers Party, Pyramid Party of India, Kanshiram Bhaujan Dal, Proutist Party, Sanatan Sanskriti Raksha Dal, Aapki Apni Party (Peoples) and several others.

The Hindu spoke to a few of these nominees to find out their motivations in contesting the upcoming election.

Rose meal

Jair Ram Lal has been eating a rose daily for the last three years. He said: “It is very bitter and so no one in my family eats it. But it keeps me healthy.” Representing the J&K National Panthers Party, Mr. Lal from Bihar said this was the third time he is fighting elections. Prior to this, he stood as an Independent candidate in municipal elections and also fought in the 2013 Delhi Assembly elections. While his party stands for abolishing Article 370, supporting the soldiers, youth and farmers of the country, Mr. Lal particularly wants to plant a bed of roses at India Gate if he comes to power. “It will be beautiful and you will wake up to a sweet fragrance,” he added.

The Pyramid Party of India (PPI) has filed nominations for candidates from three constituencies. “Our ‘Pyramid Masters’ are not contesting elections but only participating in them,” said DLN Shashtri, the party head in Delhi.

The PPI is a part of Pyramid Spiritual Societies Movement — an umbrella spiritual group registered in Hyderabad — and has been contesting elections in Andhra Pradesh and Telangana since 1999 as a means of spreading the group's message, Mr. Shastri said.

Deepti Nadella, the representative from East Delhi and ‘Pyramid Master’ for the last three years put the group's mission succinctly: “We want people to meditate, become vegetarian and then vote.” This would let individuals listen to their own inner voice, she added. Ms. Nadella has been travelling the country spreading the message at the groups various “vegetarian rallies”, which they said take place regularly. To be a pyramid master, one only needs to learn to meditate and follow 18 principles of the group, “It is not too hard,” she assures.

Lost way

Ravendra Kumar of Kanshiram Bhaujan Dal, who is contesting from Chandni Chowk, said political parties today have lost their way. “Everyone talks of casteist and communal issues. Meanwhile, there is no attention being paid to things like education,” he said. He believes farmers should be paid the right price for grains and the increasing privatisation of jobs must be stopped. A follower of BSP founder Kanshi Ram, he feels that the Mayawati-led party has strayed from the founder’s path.

“The Proutist Party will be fighting five seats in Delhi,” said Yudhbir Singh Khatana, an ex-serviceman, who is also fighting elections for the first time. Started in 1959, the agenda of the party is to ensure a cap on the amount of money an individual can earn. “There is a lot of focus on trying to remove poverty. The rich are becoming increasingly rich,” he added.

Mr. Khatana knows that the party will not form the government but believes the BJP does not have a credible Opposition to raise questions and give good advice, a role his party hopes to occupy.

Disappointed by BJP

Dilip Kumar of the Sanatan Sanskriti Manch, runs a laptop repair store in Nehru Place. Contesting for the first time, he said he voted for the BJP in the previous elections thinking they would help the Hindu community. “I have been disappointed,” he said. Among his major disappointments has been the cases filed against ‘godmen’ like Asaram Bapu and Ram Rahim Singh. “The cases were not investigated fairly,” he added.
