DNA Edit: Judicial horror - It is time to get to the bottom of the case

By any reckoning, the last five years can be described as one of the darkest chapters in Indian judiciary. After the unprecedented January 2018 revolt by four sitting judges of the Supreme Court, alleging that all was not well with the administration of the apex court, accusing the then Chief Justice of India (CJI) of breaching rules in assigning cases to appropriate benches, now comes another bombshell. This time, it is intensely personal. CJI Ranjan Gogoi has been charged with sexual harassment by a former woman staffer, who had worked at his home office last year. That the highest court in the land has been brought to rank disrepute, is an understatement.

Any allegation against the CJI should be considered a blot on the judiciary itself and if it relates to personal perfidy, it makes the case even worse. The more damaging aspect of this sordid exercise is that the CJI himself has hinted about a “bigger force’’ behind the charges made by the woman concerned, to “deactivate” the CJI’s office. Anguished over the allegations, Gogoi warned that “the judiciary in this country is under serious threat.” The CJI’s suggestion that there were dark forces behind the move, as the bench headed by him was going to listen to “many, many’’ sensitive cases, needs to be treated with utmost seriousness. If India’s somewhat discredited politicians are using underhand, below-the-belt tactics to subvert the judicial process, it is a case of grave concern. In the past, there have been some occasions when political interference in the working of the highest judiciary has come up - most notably the Emergency between 1975-77 - such distortions, such as they are occurring now, have never taken place. It would be, however, instructive to remember that CJI Gogoi is part of the four brother judges, who unprecedently, held a media briefing last year, making out a case of the judiciary being in deep crisis and its workings under serious threat.

While the CJI has thrown a hint or two, he has not, as can be expected, taken names to describe what or who these darker forces are. But by any safe deduction, it may have something to do with the hearing in the Rafale case that is expected to come up this week. By any logic, the interests of both the ruling party and the opposition are involved; for the ruling party, it is the question of a hearing in a case that can be politically damaging right in the midst of a General Election, while for the opposition, it is a statement attributed to the apex court by a leading opposition light, that can be falsified, providing just the ammunition that the ruling party needs. Be that as it may - with the political corridors in the capital buzzing - it is time to get to the bottom of the story, as quickly as possible. It does no credit to India, one of the world’s fastest-growing economies, if its highly-respected judiciary is shown in such poor light.
