Morning digest: Improvised bomb defused near Colombo airport; ready to enter Varanasi fray, says Priyanka Gandhi Vadra; and more

A select list of stories to read before you start your day.

Over 200 people were killed and nearly 500 injured in a series of blasts that shook Sri Lanka on Easter Sunday. Churches and luxury hotels were targeted in the deadliest incidents since the civil war ended a decade ago. As many as eight blasts occurred in and around the capital Colombo and in the eastern city of Batticaloa on Sunday morning, as large groups gathered at churches for Easter services.

An improvised pipe bomb discovered close to Colombo’s main airport was successfully defused by the Sri Lanka airforce, police said.

Raising the pitch over India's nuclear capability, Prime Minister Narendra Modi on Sunday said that his government, unlike the Congress, had refused to be intimidated by Pakistan's nuclear threats and given it a “fitting reply” through the Balakot air strike.

All India Congress Committee general secretary Priyanka Gandhi Vadra has said that she is willing to contest in the Varanasi parliamentary constituency in Uttar Pradesh, from where Prime Minister Narendra Modi is seeking re-election.

Four Indian nationals were killed in the Colombo serial blasts while six others are reported to have escaped with minor injuries. The four victims have been identified as P.S. Raseena, Lakshmi, Narayan Chandrashekhar, Ramesh.

Campaigning for the third phase of polling in 116 Lok Sabha constituencies across 15 States and union territories ended on Sunday. The third phase of voting on Tuesday will decide the fate of BJP president Amit Shah from Gandhinagar in Gujarat and Congress chief Rahul Gandhi from Wayanad in Kerala, his second seat.

For a moment, it seemed as if M.S. Dhoni had clubbed Royal Challengers Bangalore to another impossible defeat. With 26 needed off a breathless final over, Dhoni had sent Umesh Yadav soaring over the ropes three times, leaving his side two to score off the final ball.

The 2019 Lok Sabha election has seen the Supreme Court intervene time and again with the Election Commission (EC) to do the right thing.

Distinguished by the green and brown plumage on its back, the dimunitve Horsfield’s Bronze Cuckoo (Chalcites basalis) is a native of Australia and New Guinea.

Prime Minister Narendra Modi said on Sunday that he had warned Pakistan of “dire consequences” if the pilot (Wing Commander Abhinandan) was not freed immediately during the post-Balakot skirmishes with the neighbouring country in February.
