Sikhs in south Kashmir don’t fear militants but want government jobs

The Sikhs living for generations in south Kashmir don’t see any threat from militants in the area. The area has been a hotbed of terror activities for the last few years. Instead what they are yearning for is government jobs that will give the minority community better representation in the state’s functioning.

While most of the people say there is no fear of the terror groups, they are shy to come out and openly speak about their political choices and problems when it comes to the elections.

"We don’t face any threat but we want more jobs. There are hardly any Sikhs in government jobs and private jobs are not that lucrative here," said a 27-year-old medical representative.

The kids in the area go to private schools but with little employment opportunities in the private sector and lack of government jobs, employment is a problem for the younger generation.

Another middle-aged man who didn’t wish to be named said that he has a government job but the new generation is suffering.

Not used to visits from political candidates, many from the Sikh community including children, women and the old gathered at a Gurudwara in Sangsoo, a village in Anantnag district ahead of the election on April 23 to welcome BJP candidate Sofi Yousuf from the area.

With increased terror activities and regular shootouts between security forces and militants, Anantnag is probably the most conflict-hit Lok Sabha constituency in the country.

Yousuf, with his head, covered made it to the Gurudwara amid chants of kirtan (hymns) being sung. Soon, the singing stopped and BJP candidate began the address with the customary Sikh war cry, Bole So Nihal. Sat Sri Akal as the gathering of men and women sat on the floor, separated, on two sides of the Gurudwara.

"The Quran says those who safeguard their motherland are the true custodians of Islam... We love our mother India more than our own mothers also," Yousuf said while addressing the people.

Yousuf said that he is loved both by the Muslims and Sikhs of Kashmir and believes jobs for youth and development is the only solution to get rid of problems in Kashmir.

The Anantnag constituency comprises of district Pulwama, Shopian, Kulgam and Anantnag.

The election in Anantnag is divided into three phases.

The Centre had deployed 100 companies of Central Armed Police Force and now with elections left only in Anantnag and Ladakh, the maximum deployment will be pressed into action for the only seat in South Kashmir.

Also read: Security beefed up across Kashmir valley as Lok Sabha election phase 2 gets underway

ALSO WATCH| I see the rise of BJP in Kashmir: Khalid Jehangir
