Are Your Favourite Skin Care Products Causing An Allergic Reaction?

The current buzz around skincare and the never-ending barrage of beauty and self-care products often tempts people to binge on multiple products, but too much of anything can never be good. Your skin might embrace most ingredients, but the same might not be the case for everybody. Consumers frequently report allergic reactions—which can be anything from a simple itch to painful blisters—to treatments and new products. And despite what you may believe, even natural ingredients can act as triggers. So how do you know if you have had a reaction to your beauty products, and more importantly, how do you take care of it? Here's what the experts had to say.

What does an allergic reaction to a skincare ingredient look and feel like?

“In medical terms, contact allergic dermatitis or an allergic reaction is an immunological reaction of the body to an antigen. The precaution and treatment for this is different from [what you would do for] a reaction from something you eat,” explains Dr Shital Poojary, dermatologist, KJ Somaiya Hospital, Mumbai. “It can affect anyone—some people have sensitive skin, while some have an inherent allergy to certain substances. Certain substances are also more allergenic than the rest, such as parabens—these are known allergens, which is why many products labels mention that they are paraben-free,” she adds. “Your body starts making antibodies to fight the allergens,” says Dr Batul Patel, medical director and dermatologist, The Bombay Skin Clinic. “At this stage, the body is in a sensitive state, and when you are expose to other allergens such as dust, a cosmetic treatment, or nuts or milk, the antibodies increase and the reaction can then manifest as a rash.”

Dr Poojary explains that there are two kinds of contact allergic reactions—the second being acute irritant dermatitis, where one sees an immediate reaction to an irritant that has come in contact with the skin. What might begin as a a burning and pricking sensation can easily result in redness, bumps and clogged pores, and often, sun exposure can worsen the reaction as well.

“To understand the allergy, doctors recommend doing a blood test to check the antibody (Immunoglobulin E or IgE) levels, and then trying to bring them down in three months,” adds Dr Patel. “Else, your body will start becoming allergic to everything—[a result of] the gatekeepers giving a wrong response to a non-harmful substance in a hyper-sensitive state.”

What should you do as soon as you feel an allergic reaction coming on?

The first thing one should do is stop using the product even if it's just causing itching, especially if it lasts beyond three days. “If you continue using the product by alleviating the irritation with home remedies such as aloe vera gel or a cold compress, it will lead to an extreme reaction,” warns Dr Patel. Dr Patel often treats cases where patients have used turmeric or tomato juice to treat mild reactions, which has then lead to a severe rash. “It's a common belief that natural products are hypoallergenic, but that is not true. Plus we don't have strict regulations on the ingredients used in natural products. Your skin and body can react to anything,” says Dr Poojary. When you suffer from an instant irritant reaction, the safest thing to do is wash with cold water, before you consult a dermatologist. Dr Patel also suggests using anti-redness or barrier creams to calm your skin before visiting a doctor. It is also important to note that some products might also cause pimples, but this is not an allergic reaction—it's simply sensitivity to a certain ingredient.

What precautions should you be taking to avoid allergic reactions?

Before you try any new product, it's advised that you do a simple patch test at the back of your ear, especially if you have sensitive skin, atopic dermatitis or eczema. The ideal solution to avoiding an allergy in the future is to identify your allergen and stay away from it, since the response will be stronger the next time. Doctors also caution against sticking with a product that leaves a burning, red or uncomfortable sensation, especially when using exfoliating products like acids or retinols. While some products do have a tingling feeling that denotes that they are working, any discomfort should not be ignored. In these cases, it is best to wash the product off with cold water and apply a soothing cream to calm the skin.

Also read:

5 DIY haircare and skincare masks you can make with aloe vera

What you need to know before you book your next facial

8 top skincare tips by the doctor who created the Vampire Facial
