PM: Pakistan returned Abhi or it would've seen 'qatal ki raat'

AHMEDABAD: Prime Minister Narendra Modi on Sunday said he had warned Pakistan of dire consequences if it harmed Wing Commander Abhinandan Varthaman, who was captured by the neighbouring country on February 27.

" A day after our pilot was captured, we convened a press conference and warned, 'Khabardaar Pakistan!" said Modi at a massive public rally in Patan on the last day of campaigning in Gujarat. He added, "I said if our pilot sustains even a scratch, don't go around complaining to the world that Modi did this."

Campaigning for four north Gujarat seats of Patan, Banaskantha, Sabarkantha, and Mehsana, the PM said: "A US spokesperson had said that India will do something big. A top US official had said that Modi had readied 12 missiles for attack."

" Fortunately, Pakistan announced that the pilot would be sent back to India. Otherwise it would have been 'qatal ki raat' (a night of bloodshed)," Modi said amid thunderous applause.Without naming Abhinandan in his speech, Modi said his strong stand against terror had ensured the pilot's safe return. "Our pilot did not come back unscathed within 24 hours just like that," Modi said. "He came back unhurt because this son of Sardar Patel's land is sitting in Delhi."

The Prime Minister attacked Congress for failing to control terrorism for four decades. He said even till recently Congress had been seeking proof of India's attack on terrorism. "Saboot, saboot, saboot...they asked after air strikes," Modi said. "Now, no Congress leader is asking for proof as the high command has warned against uttering this word because it angers Indians."

As the crowd chanted his name, Modi reiterated his commitment to root out terrorism. "Whether this chair (the PM's post) remains with me or not, either I will remain or terrorism will remain."

Later, Modi made an emotional appeal to Gujaratis to not let him down and give all seats to BJP. "Don't give them any chance to taunt me," he said. "People have decided 'Phir Ek Baar, Modi Sarkar'. The government will be formed. But if there is any loss in the tally of 26 Gujarat seats, TV people will not discuss the poll result of the country. Instead, they will ask me, 'Modiji, what happened in Gujarat?' Don't let it happen."



Facebook Twitter Linkedin EMail
