Maisuma Shuts in Protest Over Malik's Failing Health

(MENAFN- Kashmir Observer)

SRINAGAR — A spontaneous shutdown was observed in Maisuma quarter of Srinagar on Monday over the health condition of Jammu and Kashmir Liberation Front (JKLF) chief Yasin Malik.

Reports and witnesses said that all shops and other business establishments were closed in Maisuma after reports of Malik's 'bad health' reached there.

The National Investigation Agency (NIA) arrested JKLF chief Malik on April 10 after a special NIA court in Jammu gave the go ahead for his custodial interrogation by the probe agency.

Malik, who was shifted to Tihar jail under police protection, was taken into preventive custody in February by the Jammu and Kashmir police and shifted to Jammu's Kot Balwal jail.

The JKLF chief, according to his family, was shifted to a hospital in Delhi after he got 'seriously ill' following his hunger strike to protest his alleged illegal detention.

Peoples Democratic Party (PDP) president and former chief minister Mehbooba Mufti Monday warned central government that denial of meeting Yasin Malik, the JKLF chairman to his family members will have dangerous consequences.

Talking to reporters after addressing an election rally at Waripora Kulgam, Mehbooba hit out at the central government for denying meeting to the family members of detained JKLF chairman Yasin Malik and said 'further denial of meeting to the family members of Yasin Malik would have dangerous consequences.' She sought immediate release of Yasin Malik from the jail, so that he can get proper treatment.

She said Sadhvi Pragya, a BJP candidate for Lok Sabha elections facing criminal charges in most dangerous cases is out on bail and allowed to contest elections but Yasin Malik's family is denied a simple concession of a meeting which is the genuine right of the family of any prisoner.

She also demanded immediate release of Yasin Malik from the jail to allow him to undergo a better treatment and warned in case of any untoward incident, the government will have to face serious consequences.

Meanwhile, Jammu and Kashmir National Conference on Monday impressed on the government of India to ensure proper health care to JKLF leader Muhammad Yasin Malik on humanitarian grounds, saying that there is no justification of denying him required health care.

Party general secretary Ali Muhammad Sagar while expressing concern over the deteriorating condition of the incarcerated JKLF leader, said, 'There are certain unbridgeable rights conferred upon all the citizen of India, the same should not be denied to him. Reports of his worsening situation are of grave concern. I urge the GOI to move Yasin Malik to AIIMS or any other better health facility,' he said.
