Unfinished martyrs’ monument in Karnataka's Gorta may skew the vote

Five years on, residents blame politics for the slow work on memorial

The landscape is barren, the crops are dry and the wind blows hot in Gorta village near Basavakalyan of Bidar district. Suiting the weather, there’s a heated argument between locals on who to vote for. “There is only Modi [Prime Minister Narendra Modi],” says one. “Why? What has he done?” asks another. “What has the Congress done all these days?” pat comes the reply. It takes three people to pull them apart.

The community in this historical village seems sharply divided, politically. “Leaders have neither developed the village nor completed the memorial. It has left us divided; people have forgotten how to have a healthy debate,” said Sangappa Malipatil, a landlord.

The memorial in question is the one being erected in memory of Gorta residents who were killed by the Razakars — the private militia patronised by the Nizam of Hyderbad in May 1948.

Five years ago, on September 17, 2014, BJP national president Amit Shah had laid the foundation stone for the memorial announcing that Prime Minister Narendra Modi would inaugurate it. Five years on, the ‘Hutatma Smaraka’ is far from complete.

The memorial lies on the Basava Kalyan–Bhalki road around 3 km from the village. The pedestal on which a statue of Sardar Vallabhbhai Patel was to be placed is empty. Iron rods protrude out of the half built compound wall.

A team led by T. Muniraju Gowda, the then BJP youth wing president, had done the ground work for the project. He had claimed that a Bengaluru-based architect had drawn plans for the memorial and would ensure speedy completion. But that has not been the case. “I think they have abandoned plans for the memorial,” said Channabasavanna Vanke, a farmer. “People say infighting in the BJP has led to this,” he said. “Bhagwant Khuba, BJP MP, was upset that the Yuva Morcha was getting all the credit for the memorial. When he objected, the Yuva Morcha leaders left and Mr. Khuba did not complete the structure,” said Suresh Chikurti, a businessman. Mr. Shah on his visit had also promised the Dumne family, who had sheltered villagers during the fatal attack, to rebuild their ancestral home and make it a memorial. “Mr. Khuba has not even bothered to visit us,” said Mallikarjun Dumne, heir of the family. “We have decided to vote for the Congress candidate, Eshwar Khandre. Unlike Mr. Khuba, Mr. Khandre is approachable,” he added.

Mr. Khuba had announced during the foundation stone-laying ceremony that he would adopt the village and develop it into a centre of tourism. But today, in Gorta proper water supply and drainage are lacking. Power cuts are frequent. Even though the village has a high school, the PU college is in Basavakalyan, 20 km away. There isn’t even a hospital. “The MP has not held a single meeting for the development of the village. If he comes here, we will not welcome him,” said Basavaraj Malipatil of the village.

When contacted, Mr. Khuba denied having interfered in the construction of the memorial, saying MPs don’t get extra funds to develop a village. “We are supposed to see that all existing schemes are implemented well. I have done that. But, if you need to fully develop a village, it can be done only with the cooperation of the residents,” he said.
