The British victims of the Sri Lanka terror attacks and everything we know so far about the explosions which killed 290 people

At least 290 people were killed in the Sri Lanka terror attacks on Easter Sunday which included eight Britons.

In Colombo, St Anthony's Shrine and the Cinnamon Grand, Shangri-La and Kingsbury hotels were targeted in the first wave of explosions shortly before 9am local time, as worshippers attended morning services and tourists enjoyed their breakfasts.

At around the same time, explosions were also reported at St Sebastian's Church in Negombo and at Zion Church in the eastern town of Batticaloa.

A few hours later, two more blasts occurred just outside Colombo, one of them at a guesthouse, where two people were killed, and the other near an overpass.

(Image: AP Photo/Gemunu Amarasinghe)

More than 500 people were wounded in the attacks.

The British victims include a lawyer and her two children. Anita Nicholson, son Alex, 14, and daughter Annabel, 11, were having breakfast at the Shangri-La hotel in Colombo when one of the seven suicide bombers struck.

Mrs Nicholson's husband Ben confirmed they had been killed in a statement on Monday afternoon.

The family had been visiting Sri Lanka for a holiday from their home in Singapore.

He said: "Anita was a wonderful, perfect wife and a brilliant, loving and inspirational mother to our two wonderful children.

"Alex and Annabel were the most amazing, intelligent, talented and thoughtful children and Anita and I were immensely proud of them both and looking forward to seeing them develop into adulthood.

"They shared with their mother the priceless ability to light up any room they entered and bring joy to the lives of all they came into contact with."

Local media reported Mr Nicholson desperately searching for his family after the blast.

Three children of the billionaire behind online clothing retailer Asos are also believed to have been killed in the attacks.

A spokesman for Anders Holch Povlsen's wholsesale fashion business Bestseller told the Press Association the couple lost three children in the bombings.

He declined to comment on the identity of the children and it was not clear in which of the series of blasts they lost their lives.

Mr Holch Povlsen is Denmark's wealthiest man and he is one of the UK's largest private landowners with him and his wife Anne holding more than 2000,000 acres of land in the Scottish Highlands.

Former firefighter Billy Harrop and his partner Sally Bradley, from Manchester, both died in attacks.

The couple are understood to have been on holiday with their family at the time.

Assistant County Fire Officer Dave Keelan, of Greater Manchester Fire and Rescue Service, paid tribute to his former colleague.

He said: "This is devastating news and the thoughts of Greater Manchester Fire and Rescue Service are with Bill and Sally's families.

"Bill served here for 30 years, retiring at the end of 2012. He was a much a loved and respected colleague and friend. He will be greatly missed."

(Image: AP Photo/Eranga Jayawardena)

Here's what we know about the terror attacks so far

What happened?

On Easter Sunday a coordinated series of blasts ripped through churches and luxury hotels carried out by suicide bombers.

Six nearly simultaneous blasts took place in the morning at the shrine and the Cinnamon Grand, Shangri-La and Kingsbury hotels in Colombo, as well as at two churches outside Colombo.

A few hours later, two more blasts occurred just outside Colombo, one at a guesthouse where two people were killed, the other near an overpass.

(Image: AP Photo/Eranga Jayawardena)

Who was responsible?

The attacks were carried out by seven suicide bombers from from a radical Muslim militant group named National Thowfeek Jamaath, Health Minister Rajitha Senaratne said.

The seven suicide bombers were all Sri Lankan citizens but the group is believed to have links with foreign terrorist networks.

No group immediately claimed responsibility, but 24 people have been arrested in a series of police raids.

The scale of the bloodshed recalled the worst days of Sri Lanka's 26-year civil war, when the Tamil Tigers, from the ethnic Tamil minority, sought independence from the Sinhalese-dominated country. The Sinhalese are largely Buddhist. The Tamils are Hindu, Muslim and Christian.

Sri Lanka, off the southern tip of India, is about 70% Buddhist. In recent years, tensions have been running high between hardline Buddhist monks and Muslims.

Was an attack expected?

Sri Lankan officials failed to heed warnings from intelligence agencies about the threat of an attack by the group, the country's health minister said on Monday.

International intelligence agencies warned of the attacks several times, starting on April 4, Rajitha Senaratne said.

On April 9, the defence ministry wrote to the police chief with intelligence that included the group's name, he said. On April 11, police wrote to the heads of security of the judiciary and diplomatic security division, Mr Senaratne said.

It was not immediately clear what action, if any, was taken in response.

What will happen next?

Britons in Sri Lanka who need help have been urged to call the High Commission in Colombo on +94 11 5390639, while people in the UK worried about friends or family should call the Foreign Office on 020 7008 1500.

The streets were largely deserted on Monday morning, with most shops closed and a heavy deployment of soldiers and police.

(Image: AP Photo/Eranga Jayawardena)

The Sri Lankan government initially lifted a curfew that had been imposed during the night but reinstated it on Monday afternoon.

Most social media remained blocked on Monday after officials said they needed to curtail the spread of false information and ease tension in the country of about 21 million people.

Prime Minister Ranil Wickremesinghe said he feared the massacre could trigger instability in Sri Lanka, and vowed to "vest all necessary powers with the defence forces" to take action against those responsible.

Is it safe to travel to Sri Lanka?

Following the attacks the Foreign and Commonwealth Office (FCO) said : "Security has been stepped up across the island and there are reports of ongoing security operations.

"The airport is operating, but with increased security checks. Some airlines are advising their passengers to arrive early for check-in, in light of increased security screening.

"The Sri Lankan authorities have confirmed that, if you need to catch a flight from Colombo airport, you are able to travel to the airport provided you have both passport and ticket valid for travel that day. They have also confirmed that arrangements have been put in place for arriving passengers."

The airport is still open and the FCO are not warning against travel to Sri Lanka.
