Sri Lanka bombings: Government was warned in advance of terror attacks

A three-page document has revealed Sri Lankan officials had advanced warnings of terror attacks on Christian churches. Here’s why it failed to stop them.

The Sri Lankan Government received advanced warnings of terror attacks on the country’s Christian churches, but an internal political feud may have contributed to its inability to stop the bombings.

The Government had been collecting intelligence on members of a Sri Lankan jihadist group after receiving a security memo the week prior that warned of Catholic Church bombings.

MORE: How the deadly Sri Lanka attacks unfolded

MORE: Two Australians killed in Sri Lankan terror attacks

MORE: Billionaire loses three children in Sri Lanka attacks

It had also been warned earlier by security agencies in India, a close ally of Sri Lanka’s, the National Thowheeth Jama’ath (NTJ) was plotting attacks.

Members of the Sri Lankan Government knew as far back as January radical Islamists — possibly tied to the NTJ — had stockpiled weapons and detonators.

Within hours of the first round of bombings on Easter Sunday, Sri Lankan security services had found at least 24 suspects, with The New York Times suggesting they may have already known crucial information about how the perpetrators operated.

The big question now is why Sri Lankan security agencies failed to act on this intel.

The issue has sparked a new crisis in the Sri Lankan Government, in part because the country’s Prime Minister Ranil Wickremesinghe was allegedly not told of the vital information security agencies had.

It sparked an internal backlash against President Maithripala Sirisena who controls the security services and was believed to have received warnings before the attacks.

This political turmoil may be in part to blame for the deadly terror attacks.

THE WARNING SRI LANKAN OFFICIALS IGNORED

Ten days before the Easter Sunday bombings, a Sri Lankan police official warned security intelligence services a local radical Islamist group was planning to attack churches.

The three-page document, dated April 11 and translated by the Times, warned of a “possible suicide attack being planned in this country by Mohammed Zaharan, leader of the National Thawhith Jamaan”.

“You should instruct all personnel to pay strict heed to this report and be extra vigilant and cautious of the top officials and residences coming under your purview,” the document said.

The report specified the attacks could target Catholic churches and the Indian High Commission in Colombo.

The terror attacks in Sri Lanka left 290 dead and over 500 injured.

The attacks have devastated the country.

It found Zaharan had been interacting with a social media account under the name Mohammed Milhan who regularly posted hate speech against non-Muslims following the Christchurch mosque attacks in March.

The report was based on information from Indian intelligence agencies, according to a member of Sri Lanka’s Parliament.

That Sri Lankan officials failed to heed its warning has led to accusations internal government feuding may have played a part in the success of the terror attack.

HOW INTERNAL FEUD MAY HAVE HELPED TERROR PLOT SUCCEED

A longstanding rift between Sri Lanka’s president and his deputy the prime minister, which sparked a crisis last year, has come under scrutiny in the wake of the deadly bomb blasts, with questions over how the Government handled the document’s warning.

The Prime Minister had been kept out of intelligence briefings since he fell out with the President, a government minister said.

Health Minister Rajith Senaratne said the Prime Minister had not been told of the report.

It was not immediately clear what action, if any, was taken in response to the tip-off.

“When we asked about the intelligence report, the Prime Minister was not aware of this,” Mr Senaratne told reporters.

Sri Lankan Prime Minister Ranil Wickremesinghe had not been told of warnings about a possible attack on Christian churches, a government minister said.

It was not clear if the President, Mr Sirisena, was aware of the report, but the top security organisation, the Security Council, reported to him, while the Prime Minister was no longer invited to council meetings because of the rift, Mr Senaratne said.

The President was out of the country when the bombers struck. His office declined to comment.

“As a government we have to say very, very sorry, and we have to apologise to the families and their institutions about this incident,” said Mr Senaratne.

The President fired Mr Wickremesinghe last October over political differences, only to reinstate him weeks later under pressure from the Supreme Court.

Their relationship has not improved, and their differences have delayed government decisions, politicians say.

On Sunday, with the President on a foreign trip and the country shaken by the suicide attacks, Mr Wickremesinghe called a Security Council meeting but its members failed to show up, Mr Senaratne said.

“This is the first time in history we have seen that the Security Council refused to come for a meeting with the country’s prime minister,” he said.

On Monday, Mr Wickremesinghe attended a council meeting called by Mr Sirisena after his return. It was the Prime Minister’s first council meeting since the political crisis, his office said.

Mr Senaratne said security forces had raided training sites of the National Thawheed Jama’ut. The Government also believed there were international links to the attacks.

“We don’t think a small organisation can do all that. We are now investigating international support for them and their other links — how they produced the suicide bombers and bombs like this,” he said.
