Lok Sabha Election 2019: BJP steps up attack against Sharad Pawar

The Bharatiya Janata Party (BJP) has decided to step up attack against the Nationalist Congress Party (NCP) president Sharad Pawar ahead of the polling for the 17 constituencies slated for April 29. Party insiders hint that Pawar is the target as he was instrumental in bringing together opposition parties across the country and in Maharashtra.

BJP's focus is on Pawar's pocket Baramati where his daughter Supriya Sule, an NCP nominee is seeking a third term, Maval where his grand-nephew and former deputy chief minister Ajit Pawar's son Parth Pawar is a candidate, and Madha where NCP has fielded Sanjaymama Shinde.

In 2009, Pawar was elected from Madha. This year, he withdrew his candidacy from Madha saying that he did not want three members of the Pawar family in the fray at the same time.

BJP has pulled out all resources for NCP's defeat especially in these three constituencies. BJP heavyweights including PM Modi, union minister Nitin Gadkari, Uttar Pradesh CM Yogi Adityanath will be travelling to Mumbai and other constituencies. On the other hand, Pawar will address a slew of rallies in Greater Mumbai and other parliamentary segments. NCP, however, has indicated that Pawar is capable enough to launch a counter-attack on BJP. Pawar has mocked Modi's criticism of him, saying that the latter is giving him free publicity.

Calling Congress 'NCP's B team', Chief Minister Devendra Fadnavis has made it clear that the party is targeting Pawar in particular since he is the backbone of United Progressive Alliance (UPA). Calling Pawar a non-playing captain, CM said that the latter's sole objective is 'beti bachao' (avoid his daughter Supriya Sule's defeat in Baramati).

Prime Minister Modi said, "Pawar Sahab is a good man but has family issues. His nephews are out of his hands." He further attacked Pawar saying that he is a big player and knows which way the wind is going to blow. Pawar never does anything that may harm him or his family, no matter who he has to sacrifice for it.

Modi also nudged the NCP chief to denounce the proposal to make two "Prime Ministers" — one for Jammu and Kashmir and another for India as propounded by some Congress allies.

On his part, BJP president Amit Shah has attacked Pawar on his home turf. He claimed that during the NCP rule, Maharashtra's performance had dipped on every parameter.
