Snubbed by SP-BSP, Congress will contest all 80 LS seats in UP on its own

Senior Congress leader Ghulam Nabi Azad announced that the Congress party would fight for all 80 seats of UP in the upcoming LS election, without being part of SP-BSP gathbandhan.

A day after it was virtually left out being part of an anti-BJP alliance formed by the Samajwadi Party and Bahujan Samaj Party, the Congress on Sunday declared it will contest all the 80 Lok Sabha seats from the state on its own.

Senior Congress leader and Rajya Sabha MP Ghulam Nabi Azad on Sunday announced that the grand old party would fight for all 80 seats of Uttar Pradesh in the upcoming Lok Sabha election, without being part of SP and BSP gathbandhan.

Ghulam Nabi Azad and the state president Raj Babbar along with PL Punia and Pramod Tiwari held a meeting with all Congress MLAs of Uttar Pradesh and other local leaders to discuss the post SP-BSP alliance scenario and the prospects left for the party in UP.

Sources told India Today that many of the local leaders suggested Congress top leadership to contest alone without Samajwadi Party and BSP alliance but also consider having new alliance with Shivpal Yadav's newly formed Pragatisheel Samajwadi Party-Lohia (PSPL) and Ajit Singh's Rashtriya Lok Dal.

The Ajit Singh led RLD was anticipated to be part of SP-BSP collision and to contest in almost three parliamentary constituencies in West Uttar Pradesh, where Singh has a great influence on the Jat vote bank.

To a question whether his party will not forge a coalition with any political party, Azad said, "If any political party is willing to accompany the Congress, and the Congress feels that it can fight the BJP, then it will be definitely accommodated."

On Congress being left out of the SP-BSP alliance, the Congress general secretary said, "We wanted that Congress should have been a part of the grand alliance (against the BJP) in UP."

"But, if someone does not want to walk along, then nothing could be done," he said.

Sources also told India Today TV that Congress is in touch with Shivpal Yadav and Ajit Singh for the alliance but does not want to make SP-BSP unhappy at the same time, as it wants to keep the avenue open for post-poll alliance.
