Man killed in Hyd after floodlight collapses at LB Stadium due to heavy winds

Man killed in Hyd after floodlight collapses at LB Stadium due to heavy winds

In another incident, a five-year-old was also killed when a shed collapsed in Chaderghat area near Musi River.

news Accident

A man died in Hyderabad as gusty winds and unseasonal rains wreaked havoc in the city on Monday night and one of the floodlight stands of L B Stadium in Basheerbagh came crashing down on him, in front of Ayakar Bhavan. Four cars were also damaged in the incident.

The incident took place at around 8:30 pm, according to the Saifabad police. The deceased was identified as Subrahmanyam, a Goods and Services Tax (GST) employee, while the injured were rushed to a hospital.

The incident led to a major traffic jam across Nampally. According to the police, it took more than an hour to clear the wreck.

State Minister T. Srinivas Yadav, Greater Hyderabad Municipal Corporation (GHMC) Commissioner Dana Kishore and other senior officials visited the stadium. In another incident, a five-year-old was also killed when a shed collapsed in Chaderghat area near Musi River.

The Indian Meteorological Department had issued a weather warning of thunderstorm on Monday, and further forecasted that the winds would blow at 40-50 kmph.

However, gusty winds, with speeds reaching 78 km per hour, lashed the city and its outskirts. The wind had left a trail of destruction with trees uprooted and destroyed hoardings. In a few places like Vikrampuri, electric poles fell down, resulting in traffic jam and power outage. Power cuts were reported in several places in the city due to power lines snapping.

The IMD has not issued any weather warning for the next four days.

The GHMC Commissioner said four teams of National Disaster Response Force (NDRF) were asked to remain on standby for undertaking rescue and relief operations. Officials also said that during the last four days, thunderstorm in parts of the state caused extensive damage to crops in Telangana.

IANS inputs
