Summer safety tips: Coriander water - An effective Ayurvedic home remedy to treat heat stroke

Summer safety tips: Coriander water - An effective Ayurvedic home remedy to treat heat stroke | Photo Credit: Thinkstock

New Delhi: With mercury levels rising, many cities across the country are struggling with severe heat intolerance. Earlier this month, the India Meteorological Department (IMD) had issued heat wave warning for 2019, following the 6th hottest year since 1901. The sharp rise in temperature during summer can lead to heat-related illness such as heat stroke or sun stroke, heat exhaustion, heat cramps, and dehydration, even in a healthy person. But these problems can be avoided by following simple measures.

Heat stroke, in particular, is the most common problem during the summer months. It is the most serious heat-related illness and can be fatal, causing damage to multiple organs and systems, if not promptly treated. Heat stroke is a type of hyperthermia in which the body temperature is elevated dramatically. It is caused by exposure to extreme heat - 104 F (40 C) or higher.

What are the signs and symptoms of heat stroke?

The signs and symptoms of heat stroke include -

Confusion Disorientation Headache High body temperature Nausea and vomiting Rapid breathing Racing heart rate Agitation Flushed skin Lack of sweat or sweating excessively

Heat stroke can also lead to coma. Anyone experiencing any of these symptoms should seek immediate medical help to prevent serious complications.

Is there any home remedy for heat stroke?

The first and foremost steps you can take to prevent and treat a heat stroke are to avoid becoming dehydrated and refrain from vigorous physical activities in hot and humid weather.

You may also use some home remedies that can help you avoid and treat heat stroke at home. For instance, coriander and mint leaves are considered an effective natural remedy to treat and alleviate symptoms of heat stroke. Ayurveda believes that these herbs have a cooling effect on the body. Hence, drinking coriander water or mint water may help bring down the body heat. It is claimed that extracting the juice of coriander or mint leaves and consuming it along with a pinch of sugar can help cool your system.

How to make coriander water to treat heat stroke

To make coriander water, you would need –

A bunch of fresh coriander leaves

A pinch of sugar

Instructions:

Blend coriander leaves with some water to extract its juice.

Add a small amount of sugar to the juice and mix well.

You can cool it in the refrigerator for a few minutes before consuming it.

It is said that drinking a glass of coriander juice everyday during heat stroke can help ease symptoms and cool down the body. It can also help provide relief from nausea and vomiting.

Disclaimer: Tips and suggestions mentioned in the article are for general information purpose only and should not be construed as professional medical advice. Always consult your doctor or a dietician before starting any fitness programme or making any changes to your diet.
