Upgrades drive increase in F-35 costs

Upgrades drive increase in F-35 costs

With Connor O’Brien

Editor's Note: This edition of Morning Defense is published weekdays at 10 a.m. POLITICO Pro Defense subscribers hold exclusive early access to the newsletter each morning at 5:30 a.m. To learn more about POLITICO Pro's comprehensive policy intelligence coverage, policy tools and services, click here.

— Upgrades planned for the F-35 are driving up the research and procurement costs for the fighter program.

— A Democratic congressman is entering the presidential race, and calls for a boost in autonomous vehicles and hypersonic weapons.

— The Senate Armed Services chairman visits the border and no longer fears that the deployments are hurting readiness.

A message from Lockheed Martin: Who builds the unrivaled F-35? The unrivaled, high-tech American workforce. The F-35 provides unrivaled air combat superiority to the warfighter and supports high-paying, high-quality jobs for American workers in the innovation economy. More than half of U.S. based F-35 suppliers are small businesses. Learn more.

HAPPY TUESDAY AND WELCOME TO MORNING DEFENSE, where we're always on the lookout for tips, pitches and feedback. Email us at [email protected], and follow on Twitter @dave_brown24, @morningdefense and @politicopro.

F-35 PRICE HIKE: Research and procurement costs for the tri-service F-35 program has jumped $22 billion, Bloomberg reports, adding that the “estimate for operating and supporting the fleet of fighters over more than six decades grew by almost $73 billion to $1.196 trillion.”

So what happened? “The increase to $428.4 billion from $406.2 billion in acquisition costs, about a 5.5 percent increase, isn’t due to poor performance, delays or excessive costs for labor or materials. … Instead, the increase reflects for the first time the current cost estimates for a major set of upgrades planned in coming ‘Block 4’ modifications.”

TANKER DELIVERIES BACK ON: Boeing has once again resumed delivering KC-46 tankers to the Air Force, after work was stopped a second time due to debris found on the aircraft, reports Air Force Magazine.

BOEING GETS CRACKING ON F-15: Congress has yet to approve the Pentagon’s request to purchase eight Boeing F-15EX aircraft. But that hasn’t stopped the St. Louis-based manufacturer from warming up the production line.

From the St. Louis Post-Dispatch: “Unless we kind of invest ahead of the opportunity, we won’t be in a position to respond to that. As you can see we are putting an effort into getting ready,” said Prat Kumar, Boeing’s head of F-15 programs.

OIL REACTION: Tehran appears to be shrugging off a Trump administration decision on Monday that opened the door to sanctions for countries that import Iranian oil, per The Associated Press.

“Regarding the illegal status of the sanctions, the Islamic Republic of Iran basically has not seen and does not see any worth and validity for the waivers,” the Foreign Ministry said.

Yet a military arm renewed threats to close the Strait of Hormuz as a result, Bloomberg reports.

“If we are prevented from using it, we will close it,” the head of the Revolutionary Guard Corps navy force reportedly said. “In the event of any threats, we will not have the slightest hesitation to protect and defend Iran’s waterway.”

Washington says that would be a bad move, per Reuters.

Trump’s decision to restrict Iran’s oil exports could come back to bite him in the form of high gas prices, write POLITICO’s Nahal Toosi and Ben Lefebvre.

“The move is designed to further weaken the Islamist regime in Iran, which Trump views as a global menace. But it also illustrates how Trump‘s foreign and domestic priorities can sometimes clash.”

Reminder: The Defense Department is often referred to as the largest purchaser and consumer of oil in the world.

INHOFE’S BORDER TRIP: Sen. Jim Inhofe (R-Okla.) tells reporters that his trip to the southern border has eased his concerns about readiness levels for troops, writes our own Connor O’Brien.

He also thinks the next National Defense Authorization Act should reflect that notion.

"That would be just recognizing that that is training that is very effective and ... in most cases, more effective than training in garrison," he said.

COAST GUARD’S ARCTIC PLAN: “The Coast Guard’s new strategy for the Arctic calls for upgrading ships, aircraft and unmanned systems there, an effort to make sure the United States is ‘projecting sovereignty’ into an area increasingly contested by Russia and China, the service’s top officer said,” per The Washington Post.

MOULTON ENTERS THE RACE: Rep. Seth Moulton (D-Mass.), a former Marine Corps officer and Iraq war veteran, announced he’s running for president on Monday, writes POLITICO’s Stephanie Murray.

“[T]he 40-year-old Moulton has said he plans to run a campaign focused on national security and defense issues, which his campaign argues will make him a foil to President Donald Trump.”

Here’s what his campaign website has to say on defense matters: “When it comes to national security, our solution has too often been only ‘more:’ more ships, more troops, more spending. But instead of always fighting with more, we have to fight smarter. No more building outdated, costly weapons systems — we need to make sure our troops have the best technology to defeat our adversaries and support our allies. That means dramatically increasing our investment in autonomous, hypersonic, and cyber weapons — and continuing to invest in basic scientific research, education, and immigration.”

‘FROM COCKPIT TO CAMPAIGN, TWO MARINE AIRMEN GUN FOR THE HOUSE,’ via The New York Times: “They met here at the Cherry Point Marine airfield two decades ago, the start of a friendship that would be forged over hundreds of hours in the cockpit of an EA-6B Prowler warplane over the Middle East, jamming enemy radar systems. … They are now vying for two seats next to each other once more — this time in Congress.”

NGA DEPUTY CHIEF OUT: The deputy director of the National Geospatial-Intelligence Agency, Justin Poole, resigned last week after allegations of personal misconduct were substantiated, writes POLITICO’s Martin Matishak.

“Last month, multiple sources told POLITICO that [Vice Adm. Robert] Sharp had placed Poole on administrative leave for allegedly engaging in inappropriate workplace relationships.”

RETHINKING DEFENSE: A new report by the Federation of American Scientists’ Martin Hellman is questioning why the U.S. remains vulnerable to attack even after investing trillions in defense since World War II.

“We have applied some of our brightest minds to maximize the value of that investment. Yet, absurdly, we now can be destroyed in under an hour. What went wrong?”

PRIVATE VS. PUBLIC: Private shipyards have been less expensive than public shipyards for the most common type of depot maintenance for attack submarines, a new report from the Congressional Budget Office finds. The nonpartisan scorekeeper analyzed costs of overhauls for Los Angeles-class attack subs from 1993 to 2017, finding that private shipyards have been 31 percent less expensive on average, though the gap has narrowed recently.

KIM, PUTIN TO MEET: North Korea’s Kim Jong Un is expected to travel to Russia this month and meet with President Vladimir Putin, but the timeframe is unclear, POLITICO’s David Cohen writes.

The Kremlin says the meeting will be “in the second half of April.”

“Russia is interested in gaining broader access to North Korea’s mineral resources, including rare metals. Pyongyang needs Russia’s electricity supplies and wants to attract Russian investment to modernize the Soviet-built industrial plants, railways and other infrastructure.”

In need of wins: The AP has an explainer on what Kim hopes to get out of the summit, and how Putin can affect future negotiations on North Korea’s nuclear weapons.

"[Our military] is being rebuilt to a level that we have never seen before. All with great product, the best product in the world. And you know where it's made? In the USA. That's where it's made. It's all made right here. So again, happy Easter."

— Trump, flanked by first lady Melania Trump and a giant Easter Bunny, at the official White House Easter Egg Roll Monday.

— Details of new Chinese aircraft carrier revealed in sea trial footage aired on state TV: South China Morning Post

— US voices disappointment at delay in Afghan talks: AP

— U.S., India warned Sri Lanka weeks before Easter terror attacks: The Wall Street Journal

— Sanders pushes to override Trump's veto of Yemen resolution: The Hill

— U.S. offers $10 million reward for information to disrupt Hezbollah finances: Reuters

— 4 questions on the risks facing Turkey’s defense industry: Defense News

— Nick Turse, no need to whisper, AFRICOM isn't listening in: TomDispatch.com

— Former CIA deputy director makes 'Game of Thrones' cameo: CNN



Follow us on Twitter Alex Ward @alexbward
