Is it safe to travel to Sri Lanka? Here is the latest

Is it safe to travel to Sri Lanka anytime soon? You may have to make that decision yourself, given how fluid the situation is and the swirl of rumours and misinformation. But here are the latest and most important updates for you to make up your mind:

What is the situation in Sri Lanka right now?

The worst is hopefully over, but there are fresh developments.

Starting midnight on Monday, Sri Lanka will enforce a nationwide Emergency to crack down on terror elements. We don't know yet if it may affect tourists in any significant way.

At around 4.15pm IST on Monday, another bomb went off in a van in Colombo. Reports indicate the device was being defused by security agencies when it exploded. (Warning: content may be disturbing)

Earlier, security agencies discovered a cache of 87 bomb detonators at Colombo's main bus station.

On Sunday evening, hours after last of the eight bomb blasts took place, police discovered a homemade pipe bomb near Colombo's Bandaranaike International Airport. It was a six-foot device planted by the roadside. The device was defused without incident.

There were rumours that water reservoirs in parts of the country have been poisoned. However, police and the National Water Supply and Drainage Board have confirmed that these reports are entirely baseless and untrue.

The scene at one of the churches after Sunday's blast. Photo: NurPhoto/ Getty Images

Are there travel advisories for the country?

India has not issued any warning to its citizens who plan to visit Sri Lanka. However, the US has warned of more terror attacks in the country. "Terrorist groups continue plotting possible attacks in Sri Lanka. Terrorists may attack with little or no warning, targeting tourist locations, transportation hubs, markets/shopping malls, local government facilities, hotels, clubs, restaurants, places of worship, parks, major sporting and cultural events, educational institutions, airports, and other public areas," says the advisory issued by the State Department. The UAE has advised its citizens to postpone any non-critical travel to Sri Lanka in the short term.
