Revenge for NZ, IS claims responsibility: Latest developments on Sri Lanka blasts

Sri Lanka is in mourning after a series of blasts on Easter Sunday, which shattered a relative calm that had existed in the island nation since its civil war ended a decade ago. (Photos: AP and Reuters)

The terrorist group Islamic State has claimed responsibility for Sunday's blasts in Sri Lanka, in which over 300 people were killed, and hundreds more injured.

The blasts targeted churches and hotels, and foreign nationals, including 11 Indians, were among the dead. Tuesday was declared a national day of mourning.

Here are the latest updates on the situation in Sri Lanka.

ISLAMIC STATE PROVIDES NO EVIDENCE TO BACK CLAIM

The Islamic State group didn't make an immediate claim of responsibility for Sunday's attacks -- as it usually does -- but did so on Tuesday evening through its news agency. It gave no evidence. Earlier, American intelligence sources said the attack carried some of the hallmarks of IS. Sri Lankan government and military sources said a Syrian had been detained among 40 people being questioned.

Exact translation of #ISIS claim of responsibility for #SriLanka terror attacks:



"Security source to Amaq agency: The attackers who targeted the citizens of the coalition and the Nasarah (meaning: Christians) in Sri Lanka day before yesterday are fighters of the Islamic State." pic.twitter.com/MH6IGLjxrI Harald Doornbos (@HaraldDoornbos) April 23, 2019

'REVENGE FOR NEW ZEALAND SHOOTINGS'

Earlier on Tuesday, Sri Lankan junior defence minister Ruwan Wijewardene said the initial investigation of the attacks had revealed that "this was in retaliation for the New Zealand mosque attack" -- referring to the killings at two Christchurch mosques on March 15, 2019. But Wijewardene didn't explain why authorities thought there was a link.

A lone gunman carried out the attacks in Christchurch, killing 50 people. Sri Lanka has said at least seven suicide bombers were involved in the blasts on its soil. The death toll is now 321.

LOCAL ISLAMIST GROUPS BLAMED

Ruwan Wijewardene also said two local Islamist groups, National Thowheed Jamaath and Jammiyathul Millathu Ibrahim, were to blame for Sunday's bombings.

I demand the Government of #SriLanka to immediately ban National Thowheeth Jama’ath & to list them as a terrorist organization. #lka Ruwan Wijewardene (@RWijewardene) April 23, 2019

St Sebastian Catholic Church in Negombo, after bomb blasts ripped through churches and luxury hotels in Sri Lanka on April 21, 2019. (Photo: Reuters)

'PM NOT INFORMED ABOUT WARNING'

This month, Sri Lanka got a tip-off from India about a possible attack on churches by the National Thowheed Jamaath. But one government minister said Prime Minister Ranil Wickremesinghe hadn't been informed about the warning and had been shut out of top security meetings because of a feud with President Maithripala Sirisena. Sirisena fired Wickremesinghe last year and appointed Mahinda Rajapaksa in his place, but he was forced to reinstate Wickremesinghe under pressure from the Supreme Court.

EMERGENCY

Sri Lanka imposed emergency rule at midnight on Monday, giving police extensive powers to detain and interrogate suspects without court orders. An overnight curfew has also been imposed since Sunday.

PM SAYS SUSPECTS ON RUN WITH EXPLOSIVES

Sri Lankan PM Ranil Wickremesinghe told reporters that the government's security agencies were monitoring Sri Lankans who had joined Islamic State and returned home.

He also indicated the possibility of more attacks.

"Many culprits have been identified, but not all yet. Some are still on a run with the explosives," he told media.

Inputs from Reuters
