Delhi: Emergency services affected at Safdarjung Hospital as doctors strike

Emergency services at Delhi's Safdarjung Hospital were affected after a resident doctor was thrashed by the son of a Delhi Police head constable. The constable's son Akshay was brought to the hospital for stomach treatment. The incident occurred on Sunday morning following which resident doctors did not report to work making it inconvenient for the patients who had arrived to be treated at the emergency.

According to the police the incident occurred around 7am on Sunday when the accused Akshay (24) complained of stomach pain to his father Virender, who is a Delhi Police Head Constable posted at Safdarjung police station. Virender further called up the Duty Constable Vinod at the hospital informing him that his son would be coming to the hospital for treatment. Vinod as well as Virender have been suspended pending enquiry.

With the help from Vinod, Akshay along with his friend Rajesh went to the hospital for abdomen pain. Resident Doctor Ravinder Nath Thakur (28) was attending the patient. Investigating officials stated that Akshay was in pain and was attended by a senior doctor. The accused thought the doctor was not treating him properly and engaged in a verbal spat with him. Akshay later punched Thakur on his nose and his nose started bleeding. The doctor was immediately treated and his condition is stated to be stable.

Devender Arya, Deputy Commissioner of Police, South West confirmed the incident and said "A case under sections 353 (Assault or criminal force to deter public servant from discharge of his duty), 332 ( Voluntarily causing hurt to deter public servant from his duty), 186 (Obstructing public servant in discharge of public functions) of the Indian Penal Code as well as Delhi Medicare services Personals and Medicare services Institutions (Prevention of violence and damage to Property Act _ 2008) has been registered at Safdarjung police station. The accused is currently absconding,".

Ashu Kumar Meena, Vice President, Resident Doctor's Association, Safdarjung stated that it was the third case of violence with the resident doctors in the last week. "Earlier as well a doctor from plastic surgery and another from medicine were thrahsed. We will be on an indefinite strike if the culprits are not arrested and the security at the hospital needs to be beefed up," said Meena.

PUNCHED ON NOSE

The accused Akshay, a son of head constable of Delhi Police punched resident doctor Ravinder Nath Thakur on his nose. Akshay was admitted to hospital for stomach pain and thought the doctor was not attending him well.
