After Sri Lanka, these are the ways we need to change our approach to terrorism

Sri Lankans are still trying to understand why so many innocents were blown up in their fragile country. It’s not a question that can be easily answered. For now. The people and nation are traumatised.

Soon they will want to lay blame and hold people to account. Understandably. Muslims will be seen as enemies, and inter-communal tensions will get worse. Western powers will again issue terrible warnings of the “Muslim threat”. The hard right will exploit this latest act of terror. Muslim defensiveness will intensify. Arguments and hate will overspill online.

These are the responses we have come to expect after savage Islamist attacks. Can we, this time, break the patterns and expectations, think and act in ways that are less divisive and one-dimensional? We can’t stop ideologically driven murderers but we may just hold the centre together so things don’t fall utterly apart. There are lessons to learn from the recent past.

A guide to today's talking points, straight to your inbox Email address is invalid Thank you for subscribing! Sorry, there was a problem.

‘Why does the media disproportionately foreground our nationals?’

Count the whole death toll – not just the Brits

Perhaps Western journalists should show a little more sensitivity when reporting such disasters. Every life, every race, every human matters equally. Britons whose relatives and friends died or were injured will be feeling the same anguish as Sri Lankans, Turks, Indians, the Portuguese, Chinese, Dutch, and Australians who have links to the victims. Such events remind us of our common humanity. So why does the media disproportionately foreground our nationals?

Secondly, while we mourn properly for the victims and families of Islamist terrorists, spare a thought for blameless Muslims worldwide. Imagine life for them in Sri Lanka in the near future. Or in nearby India where Hinduist national fervour is high. These monstrous terrorists care nothing about their fellow believers. They hate us more than they do non-Muslims.

Next, we need to become factually literate. There is a tendency to attribute every evil terrorist act to Isis. Not that long ago, al-Qaeda was the ubiquitous peril, before that it was the Taliban. I have often lazily ascribed terrorist acts to one or other of these groups. We need to be more exact and accurate, and try to keep up with what is going on in the heaving Islamist underworlds where alliances break up, re-form, and mutate like internet viruses. We may still get it wrong but we should try harder. National Thowheeth Jama’ath, thought to be behind the attacks, appears to be newly formed. In time we will learn more. But what happened was too well planned and executed for an emerging, internal collective. One can reasonably hypothesise that international operators were involved.

There are similarities between what happened in Sri Lanka and the attacks in Mumbai in 2008. Members of Pakistan’s Lashkar-e-Taiba militant group carried out co-ordinated shooting and bombing attacks lasting three days.

At least 174 people died and more than 300 were wounded. The beautiful Taj Hotel was on their hit list, also train stations and a Jewish centre. Investigators found that the young men who carried out the killings were coldly being instructed by older men, their minders, safe and sound in Pakistan.

Confused, troubled, angry

This brings me to my most controversial argument. Can we think of suicide bombers as groomed, brainwashed young men, who have surrendered to the power of the truly evil plotters and real conspirators? To decide to blow yourself up before you have lived is unnatural, a sign of irreversible pessimism.

If you read the biography of the Manchester bomber, you realise he was turned into a violent machine, primed to kill and take his own life.

Many youthful bombers are confused, troubled and angry. Alam (not his real name) was one of them. I met his mum last year in Yorkshire and she told me she snatched him back from the jaws of a terrorist trainer, an older Pakistani man, who had befriended the family. She was a widow. Her son liked the old chap, talked to him for hours. Then she found messages on his phone, urging him to go and become a martyr in India. She hid his passport and warned him she would go to the police. After weeks of terrible disputes, her brother, a hospital administrator, took the boy on holiday and persuaded him to go to college. The young man’s life was turned around. He is now an ambulance driver. Maybe others could be pulled back from wanting to kill or die.

Islamist leaders are not afraid of condemnation. They welcome disorder, vengeance and retaliation. Thoughtfulness and rehabilitation would confuse them and could save young, embryonic jihadists. It’s worth trying. After all, everything else has failed.

Twitter: @y_alibhai
