Jhansi Ki Rani, April 23, Written Update: Manu stumps Captain Ross; Sakku Bai plans to attack the palace

Screen grab from 'Jhansi Ki Rani'

Sakkubai instigates Gangadhar against the Peshwas by saying that they purposely served them meat. Sakkubai feels the Peshwas not want the Newalkars to become more popular than them, and hence they want to humiliate them.

Meanwhile, Manu reaches Gangadhar's court to produce the British officer who added meat in the food meant for the Newalkars. The British officer lies to Gangadhar by saying that he mistook the kitchen for British kitchen and mixed meat thinking he would get to eat the food. Thus he saves Janki Bai and Captain Ross from coming under the radar.

To cover up his misdeed, Ross admits that he hasn't given his men the right information. The Peshwa feels sorry for the mishap, but Manu asks them not to worry. With the help of her friend Manjari and her team, Manu cooks food for everyone, and her efforts leave Gangadhar mighty impressed.

In the kitchen, Manu realises that she can tap the enthusiasm and dedication of the widows who have been discriminated by society. Manu, who was in search of real patriotic Indians, finds her army in the young women.

Later in the day, Manu shares her concerns with Kashi and says that they must disrupt the railway project to save India.

Interestingly, Captain Ross (who knows that Manu had blown up the engine) is better equipped to save his project now. He decides to invite Gangadhar and Manu to the railway site and tell them about the Bhoomi Pujan he has conducted to ward off evil intentions.

He indirectly refers to Manu's desperate attempts to stop the rail project. Manu knows that the rail project will be beneficial only for the British because they will export raw materials and animals out of India. Manu wants the British to stop the exploitation of India's human and natural resources in the name of development.

There's another enemy of Gangadhar apart from the British. Sakku Bai plans to attack Gangadhar with the help of the Bundels. She gives the map of the Jhansi palace to the Bundels to help them invade the kingdom.

Will Manu be able to stop the British and Sakku Bai with the help of her women's army?

Stay tuned to know what happens next.
