Lok Sabha elections 2019: CM, Pawar, Uddhav raise poll pitch across MMR

Chief minister Devendra Fadnavis on Tuesday targeted Nationalist Congress Party (NCP) chief Sharad Pawar for withdrawing his candidature in favour of his grand nephew Parth Pawar, saying that the veteran leader was “not ready to fight”. “He has sent kids to fight now,” Fadnavis said.

Fadnavis made the comments while campaigning at Kamothe, Panvel, for Shrirang Barne, sitting MP and candidate from Maval constituency of the Bharatiya Janata Party (BJP) - Shiv Sena alliance.Barne is running against Parth Pawar.

Attacking Sharad Pawar, he said, “What is the status of NCP and Congress? Pawar said ‘I am opening batsman,’ went to the pitch and was all set to bat. However, on seeing Modi’s googly, he returned to the pavilion and declared that he is the 12th man. When the captain himself is not ready to fight, what will happen?”

Asserting that Mawal voters will “create history,” the CM said Barne’s victory margin will be even bigger this time. He asked voters to “send the parcel that Pawar has sent from Baramati back to Baramati.”

The CM said this election is not a regular one. While it is about development, it is also about national dignity, he said.

Elsewhere on Tuesday, Fadnavis refuted Opposition allegations that the state government’s ordinance passed last month giving property tax waiver to houses up to 500 sq ft is a “farce”.

“If the property tax waiver is questioned, misinterpreted or further decisions need to be taken, then Shiv Sena chief Uddhav Thackeray and I among others are here to make it possible,” Fadnavis said. The CM was addressing a rally at Andheri for Sena’s sitting MP Gajanan Kirtikar when he made the comments. Mumbai Congress chief Milind Deora had alleged that even after the ordinance, only the general component (30-40%) of the total tax structure is waived off whereas the rest is still being levied. “The Congress says that only a part of tax is waived off and the rest is not, we will make another decision and make sure that the tax is waived off,” he said.

Uddhav hits out at Mufti, Rahul

Shiv Sena chief Uddhav Thackeray on Tuesday took potshots at Congress chief Rahul Gandhi and former chief minister of Jammu and Kashmir, Mehbooba Mufti. Thackeray was in Kalyan campaigning for Lok Sabha candidate Dr Shrikant Shinde.

Thackeray took a dig at Mufti for making comments in support of Pakistan. “(PM) Modi had aimed his statement at Pakistan but why is Mufti replying for it. Ideally, Pakistan should be giving an answer, Mufti should be supporting India. This is the difference between us and the opposition, Kashmir is a part of the country and belongs to all of us. Congress does not know the difference between being in favour of the country and being against it,” said Thackeray.

He targeted Gandhi for supporting article 370, which gives Jammu and Kashmir special status. “All those who play with national security should not be given the right to contest elections. Traitors of the nation should be hanged to death. Imagine the plight of the country if such traitors come to power,” said Thackeray. He also praised members of the army for their continuous and diligent efforts in protecting the nation.

Holding a rally later in the day, in Thane, Thackeray said people who had supported “terrorist” Ishrat Jahan should be ashamed to raise doubts on the bravery of our soldiers. Thackeray was in Thane to campaign for Shiv Sena candidate Rajan Vichare from Thane constituency.

Ishrat Jahan, a 19-year-old woman from Mumbra, and three others were killed by the police in an “encounter” on the outskirts of Ahmedabad on June 15, 2004. Thackeray said, “The opposition is today asking us if we aren’t ashamed to fool people. I want to ask aren’t they ashamed to ask the army how many Pakistan soldiers were killed in the Balakot strike? These people who went to Ishrat Jahan’s house should be ashamed of questioning our army.”

‘Modi has damaged our top institutions’

Nationalist Congress Party (NCP) chief Sharad Pawar on Tuesday accused Prime Minister (PM) Narendra Modi of damaging the top institutions of the country and said the PM cannot be only for Hindus.

Pawar was speaking in Kharghar campaigning in support of his grand nephew Parth Pawar, who is contesting from Mawal constituency.

“RBI (Reserve Bank of India) is our top financial institution. Its governor left for a job overseas. Modi then got his confidante Urjit Patel of Gujarat. He resigned in six months. I have come to know that in private, he said that he cannot work under the present dispensation.”

Pawar said the independence of the judiciary is also under threat. “The SC judges had to call a press conference to complain that there is interference.”

Castigating Modi, Pawar said, “He is talking of Hindutva. How can the prime minister of the country be only for Hindus. He has to be for all communities and we take oath accordingly on being elected.”
