Special Cell of Delhi Police arrests two terrorists from J&K

The Special Cell of Delhi Police along with the Shopian Police have apprehended two terrorists from Shopian district of the Jammu and Kashmir. The arrested terrorists were in contact with Naved Mustaq, an ex-constable, also known as Naveed Babu, and is the district commander of Hizbul Mujahideen.

The apprehended terrorists were identified as Kifayatullah Bukhari and a juvenile and were taken into custody after the Special Cell of Delhi police had received a tip-off that a module of Hizbul Mujahideen operating in Jammu and Kashmir and planning to attack in Delhi.

"It has been learnt that small weapons for executing target killing are difficult to arrange in Jammu and Kashmir and the terrorists are procuring the same from NCR. Information was received recently that a Hizbul Mujahideen terrorist has procured a sophisticated weapons and will join the ranks as an active terrorist," said Pramod Singh Kushwaha, Deputy Commissioner of Police, Special Cell.

The intel was further developed and the team of Special Cell reached the Shopian district to arrest the terrorists. The police department in Shopian was also informed about the raid and the operation carried as a joint operation.

"The information was further developed by the team and was shared with their counterparts in Shopian district. Immediately, on the specific input of Special Cell, a trap was laid in the area of Shopian with Shopian Police. The team acted swiftly and apprehended two active militants,"added Kushwaha.

The arrested terrorists were in contact with Naved Mustaq (30), an ex-constable who had joined Jammu and Kashmir Police in 2012 and was serving as a police constable before joining terrorists. He had decamped with four weapons in 2017.

During this ongoing operation, an underground hideout which can accommodate 4-5 terrorists at a time was also identified. One pistol along with 14 cartridges have been recovered from the militants.

ATTACK ON DELHI
