Thunderstorm, Lightning Likely In Delhi, Adjoining Areas Tomorrow

Delhi weather: Thunderstorm, lightning predicted in Delhi-NCR tomorrow.

The India Meteorological Department on Wednesday issued a warning that Delhi and its adjoining Noida, Gurguram, Faridabad, and Ghaziabad are likely to witness thunderstorm and lightning on Thursday (April 25).



Besides Delhi and NCR region, Rajasthan which has been witnessing dry weather from the past few days is also likely to reel under heat wave conditions in the next 24 hours.



Himachal Pradesh will also receive rain showers and thundershower activities during this period, while rain in Uttarakhand will be isolated, the weather department predicted.



According to the weather experts, the western disturbance will keep giving weather activities over all the three hilly states until April 25. Thereafter, the weather will move eastward leading to dry conditions once again.



Today, the region is expected to witness scattered dust storm and thundershower activities to commence over northwest and west Rajasthan.



"Similar weather conditions would prevail in the region till April 25. Places like Sri Ganganagar, Hanumangarh, Churu, Bikaner, Jaisalmer, Barmer, and Jodhpur might experience dust storm activities followed by light thundershowers or thunderstorms. During this period, there are chances that wind speed might reach 50-60 kmph gusting at 70 kmph," added Skymet, a private weather forecasting agency.

The weather department also predicted that coastal Tamil Nadu and Puducherry may witness moderate to heavy rainfall beginning early next week.



Light to moderate rain is likely to occur at isolated places over Tamil Nadu between Tuesday and Friday, it said.



According to the Indian Meteorological Department, Chennai, a low-pressure area is likely to develop over Indian Ocean and Bay of Bengal and move towards the coastal region in Tamil Nadu intensifying into a storm.



"A low-pressure area is very likely to develop over Equatorial Indian Ocean and adjoining South-West Bay of Bengal around 25 April. It is very likely to intensify into a depression by 27 April and move towards Tamil Nadu coast and intensify into a cyclonic storm by 29 April," said Met department official.



"Due to this cyclonic activity, moderate to heavy rain likely to occur over coastal Tamil Nadu and Puducherry on April 29 onwards," he added.
