Sri Lanka blasts: Government admits 'major' intelligence lapses; US denies providing prior warnings

While addressing a press conference, State Minister of Defence Ruwan Wijewardene accepted that there has been major lapses in the security arrangements. US denies providing intelligence on Easter attacks Sri Lankan and international media reported that India and the US provided specific warnings about terror attacks to Sri Lanka, ahead of the Easter Sunday bombings. The US however denied providing Sri Lanka with advance intelligence prior to the attacks. "We had no prior knowledge of these attacks," US Ambassador to Sri Lanka Alaina Teplitz was quoted as saying by the CNN. At least four Americans were killed in the attacks. She said, "the Sri Lankan government has admitted lapses in their intelligence gathering and information sharing." Nine bombers including a woman involved: Nine suicide bombers, including a woman, were involved in the massive Easter Sunday bombings that killed at least 359 people, a top police officer said. So far 60 people have been arrested in connection with the attacks, police spokesman Ruwan Guansekera said, adding that more than 500 people have been injured in the bombings. The National Tawheed Jamath (NTJ) has been named as the perpetrators by the government, but it has not claimed responsibility for the attacks. The Islamic State terror group has claimed responsibility for the blasts in Sri Lanka and has identified the suicide bombers who were involved in the attacks. (additional inputs from PTI)

Three days after the devastating explosions which claimed 350 lives in Sri Lanka, the country’s government has admitted that major intelligence lapses paved way for the brutal bombings which ravaged the country on Easter Sunday. The government also indicated that heads will have to roll at the security level for failing to act on the tip-offs. As per reports , the top officials of the country have acknowledged ahead of the attacks, Sri Lanka had received intelligence about possible terror strike, but both President Maithripala Sirisena and Prime Minister Ranil Wickremesinghe have said that they did not receive the information.
