IOK shuts to show solidarity with Malik

Srinagar, April 23, 2019 (PPI-OT): In occupied Kashmir, normal life was paralyzed due to complete shutdown observed across the territory, today, to express solidarity with the illegally detained ailing Chairman of Jammu and Kashmir Liberation Front, Muhammad Yasin Malik.

The strike was also intended to protest against the cruel treatment meted out to the leader, who is in the custody of India’s infamous National Investigation Agency in New Delhi. Muhammad Yasin Malik remained on hunger strike for the 13th day, today. Call for the strike was given by the Joint Resistance Leadership. All shops were closed while traffic was off the roads in all major cities and towns. Train service remained suspended across the Kashmir valley.

APHC Chairman, Syed Ali Gilani in a statement issued in Srinagar, today, warned that Indian rulers would have to face the consequences if anything untoward happened to Muhammad Yasin Malik. He also condemned the continued grilling of his elder son, Dr Nayeem Gilani by NIA at New Delhi. Dr Nayeem Gilani appeared before the NIA for the second consecutive day, today. APHC leader, Syed Agha Hassan Al-Moosvi Al-Safvi expressed concern over deteriorating health of Muhammad Yasin Malik.

Meanwhile, people in occupied Kashmir boycotted the third phase of Indian parliamentary elections, today, and over 87 per cent people stayed away from the polling. Bijbehara, the hometown of former puppet Chief Minister, Mehbooba Mufti, recorded the lowest voting percentage of 2.00 percent. Most of the polling stations wore a deserted look throughout the day.

Several people were injured when Indian troops fired pellets and teargas shells during anti-India protests at Dehruna in Dialgam area in Islamabad district. The injured were shifted to Islamabad district hospital.

On the other hand, an APHC delegation visited the residence of ailing JKLF Chairman, Muhammad Yasin Malik, at Maisuma in Srinagar and expressed solidarity with his family members. The delegation comprised Bilal Ahmed Siddiqi, Muhammad Saleem Zargar, Ghulam Muhammad Khan Sopori, Bashir Ahmed Irfani and Syed Muhammad Shafi. The authorities booked two more youth, identified as Muhammad Yousuf and Suhail Salam, under black law, Public Safety Act, in south Kashmir’s Islamabad district.

Mutton dealers belonging to different areas of Kashmir staged protest in Srinagar against the stopping of trucks carrying live stocks at Udhampur by the authorities. Fruit Mandi traders called for an indefinite shutdown from 29th April against the stopping of fruit and vegetable-laden vehicles on Srinagar-Jammu highway.

For more information, contact:

Kashmir Media Service

Phone: +92-51-4435548, +92-51-4435549

Fax: +92-51-4861736

Email: info@kmsnews.org

Website: www.kmsnews.org
