World Immunization Week 2019: Vaccines Work and they are not just for children- 6 facts you must know

World Immunization Week 2019: Vaccines Work and they are not just for children- 5 facts you must know | Photo Credit: Thinkstock

New Delhi: Each year, World Immunization Week is celebrated in the last week of April (between April 24 and April 30). The global public health campaign aims to raise awareness of immunization and promote the use of vaccines to protect people of all ages against disease. The theme for this year’s campaign is ‘Protected Together: Vaccines Work’, emphasising the critical importance of full immunization throughout life.

Immunization is widely recognised as one of the world’s most successful and cost-effective health interventions. Yet, the World Health Organization (WHO) estimates that nearly 20 million children in the world are still unvaccinated and under-vaccinated. Immunization helps prevent illness, disability, and death from vaccine-preventable diseases. Here are five facts you need to know about immunization and vaccine safety, as per WHO.

Immunization and vaccine safety: Key facts

Vaccines are necessary to help protect people against various diseases, such as pertussis (whooping cough), mumps, hepatitis B, cervical cancer, diphtheria, pneumonia, polio, rotavirus diarrhoea, measles, rubella and tetanus. Vaccination is critical although adequate levels of hygiene, sanitation and clean water can help protect people from infectious diseases. Despite all the benefits, global vaccination coverage stands at 85% with little improvement recorded during the past few years. Misinformation and fake news around vaccines are some of the main challenges in achieving universal immunization. Vaccines aren’t just for children, they can help protect everyone at any stage of life. Immunization is a cost-effective tool that strengthens entire populations and promotes workforce productivity. It can also help address global health security threats such as antibiotic resistance. Vaccines are safe and effective because every vaccine is rigorously tested before being recommended for use. Yet, scientists are constantly monitoring information from various sources for any sign that a vaccine may cause an adverse event. A child can be given more than one vaccine at a time, considering children are exposed to far more foreign substances that trigger an immune response. Administering multiple vaccines at the same time has not been shown to have negative effects on a child’s immune system. Perhaps, this will enable fewer clinic visits, save time and money, as well as reduce discomfort for the child. Vaccines are among the best mechanisms we have to protect people’s health. Yet, a recent report by Professor Heidi Larson from the London School of Hygiene and Tropical Medicine found that public confidence in vaccines is under threat as never before. The report suggested that a new global policy approach is very much needed to stop this dangerous trend and rebuild public trust in vaccines.

Disclaimer: Tips and suggestions mentioned in the article are for general information purposes only and should not be construed as professional medical advice. Always consult your doctor or a professional healthcare provider if you have any specific questions about any medical matter.
