Weather forecast tomorrow: Delhi, Punjab, parts of Rajasthan may witness thunderstorm, lightening on April 25

Delhi, parts of Rajasthan likely to witness thunderstorm, lightning on Thursday, IMD said (Representative image) | Photo Credit: BCCL

New Delhi: The India Meteorological Department (IMD) on Wednesday issued a weather warning stating that thunderstorm, accompanied with gusty winds and lightning, was likely to take place at isolated places in Delhi, Chandigarh, West Uttar Pradesh, West Rajasthan, Punjab and Haryana on Thursday (April 25).

Apart from that, Himachal Pradesh is also likely to witness thunderstorm accompanied by hail gusty winds and lightning at isolated places on Thursday, the IMD bulletin said.

The weather department also issued a thunderstorm warning for isolated places at Jammu and Kashmir and East Rajasthan for April 25. Fishermen have also been advised to not to venture into the sea at certain places on Thursday as squally winds are likely over the equatorial Indian Ocean and adjoining central parts of South of Bay of Bengal, the bulletin said. "Squally weather is very likely over the Andaman Sea," as per the IMD.

Parts of Assam and Meghalaya are also expected to receive thunderstorm, along with gusty winds and lightening tomorrow. Meanwhile, the weather department predicted that heat wave conditions are likely to continue in Rajasthan, Madhya Pradesh, and Vidarbha.

As per weather experts, all the three hilly states in the North are expected to experience weather activities until April 25 owing to the western disturbances. Following that, the weather system will move eastward.

Scattered dust storm and thundershower activities were slated to take place over northwest and west Rajasthan. "Similar weather conditions would prevail in the region till April 25. Places like Sri Ganganagar, Hanumangarh, Churu, Bikaner, Jaisalmer, Barmer, and Jodhpur might experience dust storm activities followed by light thundershowers or thunderstorms. During this period, there are chances that wind speed might reach 50-60 kmph gusting at 70 kmph," private weather forecasting agency Skymet predicted.

On the other hand, the Met department has also forecasted that coastal Tamil Nadu and Puducherry may experience moderate to heavy rainfall from early next week. It said that light to moderate rain is likely to occur at isolated places over Tamil Nadu between Tuesday and Friday.


