ECI playing partisan role, alleges Assam Cong

GUWAHATI: The Assam Pradesh Congress Committee has slammed the Election Commission for not “acting on its complaints” against gross violation of the model code of conduct by a state minister, alleging that the poll machinery in the state played a partisan role and was like a “puppet of the ruling BJP.”

Addressing the media here on Wednesday, APCC president, Ripun Bora minced no words to allege that despite complaints lodged by Congress, the election machinery in the state had taken no action against the ruling party for brazenly violating democratic and constitutional norms.

“We had lodged a complaint with the Election Commission in writing that Assam minister Himanta Biswa Sarma’s interview aired by a TV channel on the eve of the first phase of polls was a gross violation of model code of conduct. Yesterday also, he had committed a similar violation, as his opinion may influence voters outside the state where polls were yet to be held. But despite our complaints, the ECI has been silent. We condemn this stance,” Bora said.

The APCC further condemned BJP national president Amit Shah for his statement on the National Register of Citizens (NRC) in Kolkata on Monday when he claimed that if voted to power, BJP would first bring in the Citizenship Amendment Bill (CAB) and then implement NRC.

“We strongly condemn the statement by Amit Shah on NRC. He has challenged the authority of the Supreme Court which is monitoring the NRC update process and has put in place a time-bound action plan for final publication. Therefore, a suo motu complaint needs to be lodged against him for such utter disregard and defiance of the Supreme Court and Constitution,” Bora asserted.

The APCC president warned the state government that Congress would not allow BJP to bring CAB. “We reiterate that a mass movement would be initiated in Assam if there was any attempt by BJP to bring CAB again,” he said.

Bora further thanked the grassroots workers of the party for coping with the odds ahead of the polls.

“BJP thought it would be one-way traffic only to be proved wrong by our workers. Voter turnout has only improved as the phases progressed which is a good sign for Congress. From our assessment, we should win between eight and ten seats in Assam,” he said.

The state Congress also thanked intellectuals and the media for their positive role.
