Begusarai is the land of Ramdhari Singh Dinkar, no place for traitors like Kanhaiya Kumar: Amit Shah

BJP President Amit Shah campaigns for party candidate Giriraj Singh | Photo Credit: PTI

New Delhi: While campaigning in Bihar’s Begusarai for party candidate Giriraj Singh BJP president Amit Shah said that the land which belongs to great poet Ramdhari Singh Dinkar has no place for anti-nationals like Kanhaiya Kumar and added that the people of the state will never accept him.

Accusing the CPI candidate of his alleged role in anti-India slogans raised in Jawaharlal Nehru University in 2016 Shah said that people who want to break India will never win from here.

Known as ‘Rashtrakavi’ or national poet for his patriotic Hindi compositions, today is Dinkar’s death anniversary.

Begusarai will witness a triangular fight between CPI’s Kanhaiya, BJP’s Giriraj Singh and RJD’s Tanveer Hasan. The former JNSU president is a bitter critic of the Narendra Modi-led BJP government.

Kanhaiya’s rising graph was perceived as a threat to the opposition RJD than the ruling BJP due to which the RJD decided to field Hasan from the seat.

The saffron party had won Begusarai in 2014 when BJP's Bhola Singh defeated Hasan with a margin of 5.4 per cent votes. Singh who represents Nawada constituency was the party’s choice from Begusarai.

CM Nitish Kumar-led JD(U) which is now a BJP ally has raised the saffron party's prospects in the state but Kumar has disturbed the traditional social equations with his appeal and rebellious persona.

Noted poet and Bollywood lyricist Javed Akhtar today campaigned for the former JNU students’ union president and said that he is paying the price for standing up for truth and slammed the BJP for dividing the country into sectarian lines.

“If you are thinking of not voting for the young man, vote for Giriraj instead of wasting your vote on Tanveer Hassan (RJD candidate),” he added.

In 2016, a protest was organised by left-wing students in JNU to protest against the capital punishment awarded to terrorist Afzal Guru for his role in the 2001 Indian Parliament attack and Kashmiri separatist Maqbool Bhat.
