Interesting Details About Salman Khan’s Dabangg 3 That Are Making The Wait Unbearable!

Bollywood’s very own Bhaijaan, Salman Khan, is all set to make 2019 his year. After the disappointment called Race 3 in 2018, Salman is all set to redeem himself, and in the grandest way possible. He will be offering Eidi to his fans with Bharat that will release on Eid, 2019. Later, around Christmas, he will strike again with the third installment of his cop film, Dabangg. So in a span of around 7 months, fans will have a double treat from Salman with Bharat and Dabangg 3.

While the makers have already released the trailer for Bharat and the songs from the film will be released soon one after the other, all we have from Dabangg 3 sets are just some snaps from the sets and snippets of information about the film. But these snippets are so interesting in themselves that these are making the wait till December almost unbearable and impossible.

Want to know all of these pieces of information? Check these out here:

1. Shoot In Salman’s ancestral town

Salman Khan began the shoot for the film at Indore. Incidentally, Salman Khan’s family is from Indore and it is also the town where the superstar was born. This is also his first film to be shot in Indore. Do you also feel that his birthplace would bring out the best in him?

View this post on Instagram Shooting for #dabangg3 on the beautiful ghats of Narmada A post shared by Salman Khan (@beingsalmankhan) on Apr 2, 2019 at 5:17am PDT

2. No item numbers

You might have either danced your hearts out or have strongly criticized to songs like Munni Badnam or Favicol, but, there is no denying the fact that these songs were immensely popular. Dabangg 3 with not give you a chance to be appreciative or critical, because it will not have any item numbers. We are pretty sure though that the makers will compensate for it.

3. SRK’S cameo

Once again, we will be able to see two Khans share screen space. We are talking about Shah Rukh Khan and Salman Khan. Yes, Shah Rukh will be doing a cameo in the film.





4. Salman’s niece's debut

Dabangg 3 will also mark the debut of Salman Khan’s niece, Alizeh Agnihotri. Alizeh is the son of director Atul Agnihotri and Alvira Agnihotri. While the news is not yet confirmed, we believe that it would indeed be a good platform to launch Alizeh.

View this post on Instagram A post shared by Alizeh Agnihotri (@alizeh_agnihotri_) on Feb 23, 2019 at 10:24am PST

5. Song with 500 background dancers

If the leaked videos and reports are to be believed, then there would be a grand song in Dabangg that will have as many as 500 background dancers. We can always trust Salman Khan to make everything grand.

How excited are you now?
