JMM chief files nomination from Dumka

Jharkhand Mukti Morcha supremo and Grand Alliance candidate Shibu Soren filed his nomination to become ninth time Lok Sabha MP on Monday from Dumka parliamentary constituency.

Soren filed his nomination accompanied by his son former Chief Minister and JMM Executive president Hemant Soren alongwith senior Grand Alliance leaders like Jharkhand Vikas Morcha (JVM) MLA from Poreyahat, Pradeep Yadav JPCC chief Ajoy Kumar, JVM Supremo and former Chief Minister, Babulal Marandi, Congress MLA, Irfan Ansari and others.

Known as one of the most senior leaders of separate Jharkhand State movement, Soren began his political career in early 1970s and quickly became popular as a mass leader. Prior to this, he became Lok Sabha MP eight times and was elected to Rajya Sabha once. Soren thrice became Chief Minister of the State and also held post of Union Minister during Manmohan Singh’s government. On the occasion the Grand Alliance held a public meeting. Addressing the gathering Soren said, “After a long struggle we have got the separate State but the dream of formation of the State still has not been realized. We have to fight once again to materialize the goal of formation of the State. If we miss this time then we will have to lose our main treasure which is water, land and forest.”

Ajoy Kumar also addressed the meeting. He said that both governments be it Centre and State only duping people by its false promises. “These governments are not working for the common men as numbers of unemployed increased drastically. People belonging to every section are crying foul. The Centre government is talking on national security but during last five years Chinese troops entered more than 450 times in India territory,” he added.

Attacking on BJP government Babulal Marandi said that the government by using several hooks and crooks acquired local people’s land for power plant of Adani in Godda in very low price. “This government is not working for the local, tribal and common people of the State. It is only working for the interests of its industrialist friends,” he added.

Recalling olden days Marandi said that when Shibu Soren won the seat several times while contesting alone from the seat but this time he was contesting as Grand Alliance candidate and Congress, JVM and RJD is giving their full support so this time he will win with huge margin.

Hemant Soren said that the Country is facing danger from various ways and one of the biggest threats of the country is BJP so we have to secure the Country from these separatists’ sources.
