Sri Lanka attacks: Indian sleuths in Sri Lanka to aid probe into Easter attacks

NEW DELHI: Indian agencies have flagged videos and online speeches by the alleged mastermind of the Sri Lanka Easter Sunday terrorist attacks, Moulvi Zahran Hashim, that were produced in Tamil Nadu and sought to lure and radicalise recruits.The cleric was found to have crossed over to India by boat with the help of smugglers to upload his lectures on You-Tube and Facebook, said Indian intelligence officials with knowledge of the matter. Hashim’s videos and speeches were also part of seizures made by the National Investigation Agency (NIA) during raids in Coimbatore last year.Following Islamic State’s claim of responsibility for the blasts, a two-member team — comprising one official each from Research and Analysis Wing (R&AW) and Intelligence Bureau (IB) — has reached Colombo to assist the probe, said the officials.The alerts issued by Indian agencies before the attacks had warned specifically about the use of radicalised suicide bombers attacking churches and the Indian High Commission in Colombo. Hashim was identified in a video of the suspected attackers released on Tuesday by Islamic State, the first concrete evidence of the central role played by the Sri Lankan cleric.New Delhi, according to official sources, had issued the first warning two weeks before the April 21 attacks that killed more than 350. The alert was based on the interrogation of Islamic State suspects arrested in Coimbatore last year. Six members of an IS-inspired module were held in September by the Tamil Nadu police on charges of plotting to assassinate Hindu leaders. The probe was taken over by the NIA in October 2018.During searches conducted by the NIA in December, the agency had recovered pen drives as well as a large number of digital devices including mobile phones, SIM cards, memory cards, CDs and DVDs containing speeches aimed at inciting hatred. Some of these speeches were by Hashim propagating Shariah law in the subcontinent, including parts of southern India.The details of seizures made by the NIA last year were shared with R&AW, which corroborated the information and alerted its counterparts in Colombo, sources said. The warnings by India were repeated two days and two hours before the attacks, said sources, who said it was regrettable that specific inputs weren’t acted upon by the Sri Lankan security apparatus.In a statement published by the Islamic State-affiliated news agency Amaq, the group said the attackers were “fighters of the Islamic State”. ET had first reported that an IS module was behind the bombings, which were supposedly in revenge for the March 15 attacks on two New Zealand mosques.Sri Lankan officials were told on April 4 of a potential plot to launch suicide attacks against Christian churches and tourist spots, government spokesman Rajitha Senaratne told reporters on Monday. There is growing anger in Sri Lanka over the government’s failure to act despite the warnings.On Tuesday, a video released by Islamic State showed eight men purported to be the Sri Lankan attackers pledging allegiance to the terror group. The men have their hands clasped together and are masked, except for one, identified as Zahran Hashim, who was “leading them”, according to Amaq’s caption.Hashim’s name appears on an April 11 memo signed by Sri Lanka’s deputy inspector general of police, naming him as head of the National Thowheed Jamath, which was blamed for the attacks.PM Ranil Wickremesinghe also identified Hashim as part of the plot at a press conference. “He is expected to be one of the suicide bombers,” he said. Wickremesinghe said investigators were making “good progress” in the investigation “but they need to identify all the culprits and look at what their network is”.He admitted that the attacks could have been prevented, if intelligence had been properly shared. “We, if it was known, certainly could have prevented many of the attacks in the churches and have (had) more security in the hotels,” the prime minister said. Differences between him and the President had been “thrashed out” and the priority was now to apprehend any remaining suspects, Wickremesinghe said Tuesday.President Maithripala Sirisena said he wasn’t aware of the advance warnings and that if he had been, he could have taken appropriate measures. “I have to specifically mention that intelligence was not reported to me by the responsible people,” he said in a televised address. “If I had known they had received this intelligence, I could have taken actions accordingly.”
