Tough fight expected in Odisha's high-profile Jajpur

BHUBANESWAR: The electoral battle in the high-profile Jajpur assembly constituency has turned interesting with the ruling BJD facing a tough challenge from an emerging BJP in the seat.While BJD heavyweights and former minister Pranab Prakash Das is eyeing a hat-trick from the seat, BJP has fielded Gautam Ray, who is known for his strong organisational skills. The Congress has repeated its 2014 candidate Santosh Nanda from the seat that is going to the polls in the fourth phase on April 29.The coastal constituency with around 2.29 lakh voters consists of parts of Jajpur and Dasrathpur blocks and Jajpur municipality. Though Congress has some traditional pocket votes in the constituency, political observers said Jajpur will witness a bipolar fight between BJD and BJP candidates.They said Congress, with a shattered organisational strength, is struggling to retain its traditional vote bank. Pranab, known for his tremendous influence in BJD affairs, is confident of holding fort because of party’s organisational strength, chief minister Naveen Patnaik ’s popularity and development works in the constituency. In 2014, the BJD heavyweight won the seat by a margin of more than 80,000 votes. “My relationship with the people of Jajpur is not just as an MLA. People here treat me as their family member. They are aware of what I have done for the constituency. I am confident that they will make the right choice again,” said Pranab. Even as the BJD camp in Jajpur is confident of winning the seat, they are not sure whether they can maintain the huge margin of 2014 elections as the BJP has strengthened its base over the years. The local BJD legislator also could not campaign much as he was engaged in party affairs till the end of third-phase polls.The ruling party is expected to do well in around 18 gram panchayats of Jajpur block and municipality but it may not be able to make much indent in 20 panchayats of Dasarathpur block, the native place of Ray, where he has made good progress. “I am getting tremendous response from the people as they are fed up with the corruption and inefficiency of the BJD government. People are happy about Prime Minister Narendra Modi government’s success over the last five years. I am quite sure of getting people’s support,” Ray told TOI.
