Manohar Lal Khattar: Balakot strike to help BJP in Haryana: Manohar Lal Khattar

Former RSS pracharak and incumbent Haryana Chief Minister Manohar Lal Khattar listed the three upheavals—controversies concerning self-styled god men Gurmeet Ram Rahim and Rampal Dass, and the Jat violence—among the top achievements of his tenure. He told Parshant Krar the surgical strike after the Pulwama attack will favour his party in Haryana as the state has over 16 lakh ex-servicemen families. Excerpts:Even though I am not fully versed with the issue, every candidate needs to abide by ‘maryada’ while seeking public mandate. No candidate should be allowed to violate maryada in public discourse.It will have the most favorable impact in Haryana compared to other states as over 16 lakh ex-servicemen families reside in the state. The prime minister’s action has given a feeling of security among people in India who were living under threat perception. The airstrike is bound to sway the voters in favour of BJP as the military action in 1971 for freedom of Bangladesh had swung the verdict in favor of the Congress led by Indira Gandhi.Contrary to media perception that these are the biggest mistakes of my tenure, I feel they are the leading achievements of the BJP tenure. Most people have appreciated the government’s transparency and administrative deftness in maintaining law and peace in these situations. I regret the loss of lives and property but the state government was able to diffuse highly volatile situations. We ensured law is abided in the arrest of Rampal and Ram Rahim. The administration had to use force on February 17 to control violence by Jat protestors demanding job quota that erupted even after the state government consented to their demands. It is well known that Congress was responsible for misguiding the protestors. The government compensated victims in two of the above cases but the court had disallowed the state from extending succor in case of Dera Sacha Sauda. The court ordered to decide on the compensation to victims of Dera violence.BJP is treading a reformist strategy of supplementing income of farmers instead of debt waivers that brought little succor to farmers in the past. The party has overcome the politics of short-term appeasement of farmers and followed the path of long term vision of doubling farmers’ income by 2022. Although, in the past, most states and parties extended debt waivers, the condition of farmers has not changed. My party has extended ?6000 financial support to farmers to take care of short term expenditure on seeds and fertilisers. BJP has ensured comprehensive procurement of crops like wheat, mustard and bajra under Minimum Support Price, increased insurance compensation and interest subvention schemes.It shows that Congress is cornered and has lost its bearing in the state. The background of Congress stalwarts like Bhupinder Hooda and behavior of Kuldeep Sharma are well known. In fact, BJP has no direct contest with any party including Congress in Haryana and the party has grown stronger in the last four and half years. We no more need an alliance in the state.The party is not averse to good candidates from other parties in the larger interest of the state. Our achievements have won us many admirers including leaders in the opposition parties who acknowledge the marked difference BJP has brought through transparent administration and put an end to corruption in appointments, transfers and tendering of civil contracts. There is no question of dissidence within the party as BJP workers are fully committed to welfare of the nation.
