Convocation ceremony: Despite warning from social justice department, Sardar Vallabhbhai Patel College of Engineering withholds degrees of 60 reserved category students

Sardar Vallabhbhai Patel College of Engineering

social justice

degree certificates

convocation ceremony

backward class

60 reserved category students ofdidn’t receive degrees;dept had warned the college against such action.Despite a warning from the social justice department, at least 60 reserved category students from Sardar Vallabhbhai Patel College of Engineering in Andheri were not given theirat theheld on Tuesday. The college said their certificates were withheld as the government didn’t pay their fees ranging from Rs 25,000 to Rs 1 lakh in different years. Though some of these students managed to pay the fees on their own and received the certificates later in the evening or on Wednesday, they were excluded from the convocation ceremony. The general complaint was that they were not informed about the dues in writing.A letter dated April 23, signed by assistant commissioner of the Samaj Kalyan office, had warned the college from withholding the degrees. Accessed by Mirror, the letter stated: “Your students have complained to the minister of social justice that you were not giving degree certificates to them for non-payment of scholarships/exam fees. It is to inform you that cognisable offence would be registered against you if you withhold the degrees or try to recover the fee from thestudents.”Assistant commissioner Samadhan Ingle confirmed sending the letter. “The social justice department pays the students’ exam and tuition fees directly to the college. The government has issued a resolution that their education should not be disturbed or restricted. Today (Wdnesday) we had sent our inspector to the college for discussion on the issue. I will seek further information on it,” Ingle said.When contacted, a few students expressed anger on condition of anonymity. One student said that he was not given the degree because Rs 25,000 as development fees from the second year was pending. “The college did not inform me that the government has stopped paying development fees in the past couple of years. I came to know about it on the convocation day,” he said. Another student was supposed to pay Rs 80,000 to the college. “I cannot pay this amount from my pocket. Also, the fee is from my second year and I have finished all four years,” the student said.The principal of the college Priyadarshi Sawant said that he would have to get information on the issue before commenting. The issue would be raised before the Senate of University of Mumbai on Thursday.
