Pak militant presented before media

Pak militant presented before media

‘69 militants killed this year’

SRINAGAR, Apr 24: Director General of Police (DGP), Dilbagh Singh today said that a Pakistan based Lashkar-e-Toiba (LeT) militant assigned for 'resurrecting' militancy and recruiting youth into militant ranks in north Kashmir’s Baramulla district has been arrested by the police few days ago.

Identified as Waqar Ahmed from Pakistan’s Mianwali village in Punjab province, the LeT militant who was operating in Srinagar city for two years according to state police chief was arrested from Pattan area of Baramulla district few days ago. He said that the arrested militant ‘infiltrated’ into Jammu and Kashmir in 2017.

Flanked by Lt Gen K.J.S. Dhillon, GoC 15 Corps and other higher-ups of police and CRPF, DGP, while addressing a joint presser at Police Control Room (PCR) here, said that the militant was trained at Muzaffarabad in Pakistan administered Kashmir before infiltrating to this side in July 2017.

“Besides being assigned for reviving militancy in Baramulla district afresh, the Lashkar militant who was recently arrested by the police was planning major attack on security forces. He had infiltrated into Kashmir in July 2017 and was active in Srinagar city for over a year now,” said Singh.

The arrested militant when brought before the media said he was brainwashed to join militant ranks by the militant handlers in Pakistan.

Clad in blue sweat suit, Waqar said that rights violation, barring people from offering prayers in mosques and women being raped by government forces persuaded him to start Jihad against Indian armed forces in Kashmir.

He however said everything his handlers in Muzaffarabad had told him proved to be farce after observing the ground situation in Kashmir valley.

DGP said that he was also trained for one month at the house of Zaki-ur-Rehman Lakhvi in Rawalpindi and he met him twice during that period.

Dilbagh Singh said that 272 militants were killed by the security forces in the state last year with Dhillon adding that 69 militants have been killed so far in encounters with government forces in Kashmir.

“After the Pulwama militant attack, we have killed 41 militants out of whom 25 belonged to the Jaish-e-Muhammad (JeM) outfit. The entire leadership of the JeM has been decimated. Nobody is now ready to head the outfit in the Valley.” They said.

The officers also said that there was a marked fall in the numbers of local youths joining the militant ranks.

“There was a marked decrease in stone pelting incidents during 2018 as compared to the previous years.” he said, adding that the security forces were in complete control of the ground and that the situation, “is fast improving”.

He said the recruitment of local youth continues to be low which he said is a healthy sign “272 militants were eliminated in the state during 2018 and a large number were apprehended.”

On the number of foreign and local militants active in the Valley, he said, "Whosoever picks up a gun will be eliminated."

During the press conference, DGP Dilbagh Singh said, "Several youths who joined the militant ranks were brought back into the mainstream. A total of 46 Jaish and Lashkar commanders were eliminated last year and this year. 27 of these were from Jaish and 19 were from Lashkar-e-Toiba."

"2018 has been a very successful year so far as the handling of law and order situation is concerned, so far as the handling of militancy is concerned," he said.

GOC added that the security forces will continue their operations against militants and will not allow any groups to survive in India.

Dhillon remarked that after Pulwama attack, the security forces targeted Jaish-e-Mohammed (JeM) leadership and succeeded in eliminating all senior commanders of Pakistan-based militant group.
