Red alert sounded in Kerala as Cyclone Fani approaches

Cyclone Fani certainly worry the fishermen as they had experienced the worst during Ockhi. (AP Photo/Aijaz Rahi)

The India Meteorological Department (IMD), on Friday, issued a warning to Kerala of cyclonic storm Fani brewing in the Bay of Bengal.

Following the possibility of the cyclone, the Kerala State Disaster Management Authority has asked fishermen in the region not to venture into sea till further notice.

According to the IMD, a low-pressure region with potential to morph into a tropical cyclone is brewing in the far east of the Bay of Bengal which might strike the coast of southern India in the next few days.

The tropical depression will move towards northeast after it approaches Tamil Nadu on Monday and will continue on the same path till Tuesday. From Wednesday to Friday, the track of the depression will change slightly in the north-northeastward direction along the coastline of Andhra Pradesh, the Met department said.

Photo: Meteorological Department, Thiruvananthapuram

IMD said that the low pressure is likely to intensify into a depression by Friday morning and then into a cyclonic storm by April 28. The cyclonic storm will further intensify while crossing the Tamil Nadu coast around April 30, with maximum wind speed of 90-100 km per hour.

Kerala is currently experiencing sunny weather and the sea is almost calm on the southern part. However, the fishermen in the coastal regions are scared after the warning from the IMD.

Kerala’s Valiyathura is the largest fisher folk hamlet in Kerala, where around 3,000 families live on the coast.

Speaking to India Today TV, Thobias, a fisherman in Valiyathura said, We follow the directives by the Met department and the disaster management authority seriously. After Ockhi, we don’t take risks.

The cyclone named Ockhi had hit parts of Kerala, Tamil Nadu and Sri Lanka last year in November. Around 89 fishermen in Kerala were reported dead and 141 people went missing after the havoc created by the cyclone.
