Akhilesh raises pitch to underline caste identity

With the first three phases of the seven-phase Lok Sabha elections over, the Samajwadi Party has raised the pitch in its campaign to underline caste-based identity of its alliance with Bahujan Samaj Party and Rashtriya Lok Dal.

“The SP-BSP-RLD alliance represents the social groups who do the menial jobs in society and are yet the underprivileged section. These sections have been denied their due share in the polity of India,’’ said SP president Akhilesh Yadav while addressing election meetings in Hardoi and Kanpur on Wednesday.

“India is passing through a difficult phase as all constitutional institutions are being subverted. Even constitutional provision for reservation to Schedule Castes and Other Backward Classes (OBCs) is under threat and the disadvantaged sections are being denied their rightful share in power structure,’’ Akhilesh said.

“The Bharatiya Janata Party in its election manifesto promised to clear the pendency of cases in various courts and also assured prompt justice. The opposite happened after five years and the pendency (in courts) increased by 50 lakh cases. If you look at the social identity of litigants, they are from SCs, OBCs and Muslims so the BJP lost interest in fulfilling the promise made in its poll manifesto and decided to leave them (these people) to their fate,’’ the SP chief charged.

Akhilesh also hit out at welfare programmes like free toilet and free LPG connection schemes launched by the Narendra Modi government. These schemes are aimed at he empowerment of people of below poverty line (BPL) category who are mostly SCs and OBCs.

“The BJP government gave free LPG cylinders to the poor only to bail out loss-making oil marketing companies so that they could dispose of the stock of additional cylinders. The LPG scheme has failed in its objective as the refill rate is nil,’’ Akhilesh claimed.

The SP chief further said that the next prime minister would be from Uttar Pradesh, even though the opposition bloc was spoilt for choices. He, however, parried a question by reporters whether he or Mayawati were in the race for prime ministership, saying, “Main chahta hoon agla pradhan mantri UP se ho. (I want the next prime minister to be from UP)”

Talking about speculation about Congress general secretary Priyanka Gandhi Vadra’s probable candidature from Prime Minister Narendra Modi’s turf Varanasi, Akhilesh said that the general elections would take a decisive turn in the last phase of polling and the BJP was already speaking the language of a loser.

“Asli romaanch aakhri charan mein hoga, intezaar kijiye,” he said.

Blasting the Modi regime for its failed promises, the SP chief said that the BJP had mastered the art of shifting public attention from core issues through last-minute polarisation. “Dhyan hatane ki rajneeti BJP ke paas hai,” he said.

“Suddenly, they are trying to shift the country’s focus to Bhopal by pitching controversial sadhvi, Pragya Thakur, and nobody is talking about unemployment or farmers’ issues. The Election Commission should take strict action against rabble-rousers,” the SP chief said.

To the ‘doodhwala’ jibe by Chief Minister Yogi Adityanath that cattle raisers got dignity because of the Constitution, Akhilesh said, “I am happy that the Constitution has given us the right, but the BJP is trying to trample upon that too.”

Akhilesh also derided the Congress strategy in UP, saying that the party was fighting the elections for 2022 Assembly polls and not for Lok Sabha.
