Modi holds roadshow in Capital

Prime Minister Narendra Modi held a massive roadshow here on Tuesday evening to bolster BJP’s prospects in Lok Sabha election in State. Modi, known for his rockstar image kicked off over 2.5 km long journey in an open vehicle amid tight security from near Birsa Munda International Airport to Birsa Chowk. The entire street as dusk descended wrapped in saffron to match the occasion.

For welcoming the Prime Minister, huge cutouts of ‘Prir Ek Baar Modi Sarkar’ road, BJP flags were put on both sides of the road. Thousands of people including enthusiastic BJP workers lined up on street for getting a glimpse of Modi. Chants of ‘Modi Modi’ ‘Phir Ek Baar Modi Sarkar’ rent the air as the campaign vehicle moved through the Capital.

It took more than one hour for Modi campaign carcade to cover the distance of 2.5 km. The Prime Minister who is known for his health consciousness reached the Birsa Munda International Airport at around 6.30 PM after campaigning in Odisha’s Kendrapara and Bengal’s Asansol apart from exercising his franchise in Ahmedabad’s Ranip area.

Chief Minister Raghubar Das, State BJP president Laxman Gilua, State BJP in-charge Mangal Pandey and senior BJP leaders from State were in Airport to welcome the PM. Chief Minister Raghubar Das, Mangal Pandey and other leaders led the procession while PM in open vehicle waving to the crowds passed through the road reaching the Birsa Chowk at 7.30 PM.

The PM at Birsa Chowk after paying floral tributes to Birsa Munda statue walked near the crowds waving and greeting the people who had assembled for more than one hour to have a glimpse of their beloved Prime Minister.

The crowd that had gathered at Birsa Chowk was much enthusiastic to see Modi. Darshan Rai (25), who had come from Tupudana to have glimpse of Modi said, “We have never seen Modi from so close. Even at this age he is fit. He is icon for all age people.”

Echoing the views of Rai, Sangeeta Munda (22 years), who too had come to see Modi said, “No other politician is as dynamic as Modi. He knows the art to read the people pulse and change people mood it as per his convenience. He is magician of Indian politics.” Both the youths claimed that they are going to vote for Modi, candidate is secondary.

Modi after carrying out road show moved to Raj Bhavan passing through Birsa Rajpath. Meanwhile, the district administration had made elaborate security arrangement for the road show. Entire stretch of Birsa Rajpath had deployment of security personnel.

As threat perception on Modi is highest after Patna’s Gandhi Maidan October 2013 blasts, the state police along with NSG commandos had frisked high rise buildings and major installations on the route.

The Prime Minister road show assume importance as BJP which has won 12 Lok Sabha seats in 2014 elections is planning to repeat its previous performance, but the anti-incumbency factor and coming together of opposition parties forming Mahagathbandhan can become a hurdle.
