PepsiCo India sues farmers for growing potatoes it uses in Lays chips

Considering buying your first home? Here are 3 tips from the experts

'It's insane': Gas station owner reveals what inflation is doing to his business

Where are all the workers? Here are four reasons behind the labor shortage

People walk by a Help Wanted sign in the Queens borough of New York City on June 04, 2021 in New York City.

Amazon Style will open a store later this year at The Americana at Brand shopping destination, in greater Los Angeles.

A sign identifies the Internal Revenue Service (IRS) building in Washington, D.C., U.S., on Monday, April 16, 2012. The deadline for individuals to file their 2011 tax returns is April 17. Photographer: Andrew Harrer/Bloomberg via Getty Images

The 1949 Buick Roadmaster from the movie Rain Man is up for auction.

Apple CEO Tim Cook during a visit to an Apple Store at The Grove Friday, Nov. 19, 2021, in Los Angeles.

WASHINGTON, DC - NOVEMBER 30: Federal Reserve Board Chairman Jerome Powell testifies during a hearing before Senate Banking, Housing and Urban Affairs Committee on Capitol Hill November 30, 2021 in Washington, DC. The committee held a hearing on "CARES (Coronavirus Aid, Relief, and Economic Security) Act Oversight of Treasury and the Federal Reserve: Building a Resilient Economy." (Photo by Alex Wong/Getty Images)

A man walks past Winter Olympics and Paralympics branding at the Main Press Centre on January 26 in Beijing, China.

Get an exclusive look at how Bud Light's zero-carb beer is brewed

US economic growth in 2021 was the strongest since 1984

New York CNN Business —

PepsiCo has offered to stop pursuing four small farmers in India it accuses of illegally growing a variety of potatoes registered for exclusive use in its Lays chips.

The company’s Indian subsidiary filed lawsuits against the farmers earlier this month. They were heard by a court in the Indian state of Gujarat on Friday, when a lawyer for PepsiCo (PEP) offered to drop the case provided the farmers join thousands of others in the company’s authorized cultivation program.

“That was a discussion that happened in the court today,” a PepsiCo spokesperson told CNN. “We told them, why don’t you join our program and we will provide seeds … Either join us or grow other potatoes. That way, we are willing to let go of the case.”

A lawyer for the farmers has asked for time to consider the offer. The next court hearing is due June 12.

Farmer unions and activists have been fighting back against the food and beverage maker over the case, the latest battle in India between local businesses and big global players. Small retailers have been protesting against companies like Walmart and Amazon (AMZN) — claiming the American giants are unfairly destroying their business — and even succeeded in getting the government to put in some restrictions.

PepsiCo, which owns brands like Pepsi, Lays, Gatorade and Quaker Oats, is reportedly seeking damages of 10 million rupees ($143,000) from each farmer. The farms they operate have only a few acres each.

“The company was compelled to take the judicial recourse as a last resort to safeguard the larger interest of thousands of farmers that are engaged with its collaborative potato farming program,” PepsiCo’s spokesperson said.

The company will not be seeking any compensation if the farmers agree to the settlement offer, the spokesperson added.

Farmers’ associations and activists in India called on the Indian government to step in and take action against PepsiCo. In a letter to the government published earlier this week and shared with CNN Business, they said the farmers’ rights to grow and sell registered crops are protected under India’s agricultural laws.

“We believe that the intimidation and legal harassment of farmers is happening because farmers are not fully aware of [their] rights,” the letter said. The letter also claims PepsiCo sent private detectives to the accused farmers posing as potential buyers, secretly recording video of them and taking samples of the potatoes.

PepsiCo did not comment on those allegations.

The company’s actions are “against food sovereignty” and the “sovereignty of the nation,” said Kapil Shah of Jatan, one of the advocacy groups helping to defend the farmers.

“This is the first bow down from Pepsi,” Shah said in reference to the offer to settle.
