Kerala IS cells played a role in Lanka blasts? Probe on

KOZHIKODE: Security agencies are probing whether any of the Islamic State (IS) modules in Kerala have links with the terror attack in Sri Lanka on Easter Sunday which killed over 350 people. Many IS sympathizers, who were earlier taken into custody and let off, were summoned by the agencies to know whether they have any clue about the attacks.Sources said nothing concrete has come out of the investigation as of now but pointed out that IS cadres in Kerala had shared the posts of Aadil AX, a Facebook account suspected to be operated by a Sri Lankan terrorist. He operated an account ‘Did You Know’, which contained posts about the “glorious past of Islam” that was used by IS to justify its deeds. The IS cadres from Kerala were very much enthused by the posts and almost all of them shared the same.An agency report has even said that Zahran Hashim, the suspected mastermind of the Sri Lankan attacks, was in direct touch with some IS sympathisers in Kerala and Tamil Nadu for over three years through social media sites like Youtube and Facebook. National Investigation Agency (NIA) had arrested some IS sympathizers like Mohammed Ashiq, Ismail, Samsudeen, Jafar Sadik Ali and Shahul Hameed from south India. The agency report said that some of them were in touch with Hashim while others were in contact with men in Hashim's network of operatives.Interestingly, there are striking similarities between the hate speeches of Hashim and some extreme Salafi preachers in Kerala. Both have been stressing on the ‘dangers’ of Muslims living in Darul Kufr (land of unbelievers) and the need to keep a distance from the Kafirs (non-believers).Malayali IS recruits had another link with Lanka when in 2016 they visited a Hadees study centre in Sri Lanka, run by Salafi preacher Nawas al-Hindi, before migrating to IS strongholds in Afghanistan.IS cadres from Kasaragod Abdul Rashid, Ashfak Majeed and Hafeesudeen joined the centre run by al-Hindi, but soon left after heated debate over IS. Al-Hindi had later stated that he ousted the Malayalis from the centre as they had spoken in favour of IS and claimed that his centre never entertained anyone remotely connected with the terrorist organisation.It may be mentioned that NIA had arrested 15 operatives affiliated to IS when they had met at Kanakmala in Kannur district in October 2016. According to probe agencies, they were plotting to attack Jews and political leaders in and outside Kerala but NIA cracked down on them after receiving a tip-off. Some of the IS cadres arrested in the Kanakamala case had links with a terror module in Tamil Nadu. Subhani Haja Moideen, an IS cadre arrested from Thirunelveli in Tamil Nadu, was trained by the terror outfit in Syria and allegedly had a role in the terror attack in Paris in 2015.Meanwhile, many Muslim organizations in Kerala have strongly condemned the terror attacks in Sri Lanka. In a statement, Sunni leader Kanthapuram A P Aboobacker Musaliyar said those who perpetrated violence have no connection with Islam. “The stand taken by the attackers is against Islam. Suicide attack is a heinous crime which is not allowed in any religion,” he said.KNM (Markazudawa) president E K Ahmedkutty and general secretary C P Umer Sullami said that Muslims need no help from terrorists and suicide bombers to save the religion.
