Broken relationship turned ugly

VADODARA: Prachi Maurya and Waseem Malek had met in Parul University where they were studying diploma in electronics and communication. They soon became friends and got into relationship “However, their relations soured and they broke up in February,” Jaydeepsinh Jadeja, deputy commissioner of police (crime) said.Prachi started avoiding Waseem’s calls as she did not want to continue the relationship. Waseem, a student of Government Engineering College in Bharuch, got upset as he didn’t want to break-off with her. He kept calling her and often came to meet her too.“Waseem told us that Prachi used to be online till late in the night but whenever he called, her phone used to be engaged. So he started suspecting that she might have got into an affair with someone else,” Jadeja said.After killing Prachi, Waseem left for his house in Gorwa area. At around 6am, he told his father Sikander Malek that he was leaving for college in Bharuch. Malek is retired as police sub-inspector from Central Industrial Security Force (CISF)Police, meanwhile, had learnt that Ankit had gone to drop Prachi at her home on Wednesday night. The cops questioned Ankit who revealed that Waseem had come to meet Prachi and the duo had heated arguments.“We then reached Waseem’s house but he had already left for Bharuch. We immediately formed different teams and reached the railway station. The man at the ticket window recognized Waseem’s photo and told us that he issued a ticket to this person,” Jadeja said.He was soon picked up from the railway station. Police said that Waseem didn’t seem to have any remorse for the brutal crime.Prachi was passionate about theatreVadodara: Prachi had joined theatre group ‘Applause Vadodara - Theatre and Art’, about a month ago as she was passionate about stage acting.Apsara Iyengar, who runs Applause group, said, “Prachi had attended our workshop and then got an acting role in the plays organized by us. She was very hardworking and acted well too. She was the first person to arrive as well as leave after the rehearsals. She had done two plays with us.”Ankit and Prachi were friends but they hadn’t worked in any play together. On Wednesday night, some play group members had seen Waseem after they got down from the bus at Alkapuri. But, no one knew that he was stalking Prachi.
