Seeking second term in office, PM Modi to file nomination from Varanasi today

The Narendra Modi-led BJP is confident of victory in the Lok Sabha election. (Photo: Reuters)

Prime Minister Narendra Modi will today submit his application to fight the 2019 Lok Sabha election from the Varanasi parliamentary seat, the constituency he won in the 2014 general election. PM Modi will file his nomination papers from Varanasi, earlier known as Banaras, which will vote in the seventh phase of the seven-phase 2019 Lok Sabha election.

Yesterday, PM Narendra Modi took part in a grand roadshow in Varanasi that saw the holy city turn into a sea of saffron. Frenzied crowds cheered the prime minister on as he made his way from the statue of Banaras Hindu University founder Madan Mohan Malaviya to the Dashashwamedh Ghat, where PM Modi took part in the daily aarti.

PM Modi is seeking a second term in office from Varanasi, a parliamentary seat he handsomely won in 2014, defeating Aam Aadmi Party chief Arvind Kejriwal by a massive margin of 3.37 lakh votes.

Narendra Modi stormed to power in 2014 with his Bharatiya Janata Party winning 282 of the Lok Sabha's 543 constituencies. The BJP won an absolute majority in 2014, reducing the then-ruling Congress to a miserly 44 seats.

WORRIES

The Modi-led BJP will be looking to better its performance in the 2019 Lok Sabha election. However, the state of the economy may prove to be the party's undoing.

A leaked government survey suggested that unemployment is at a four-decade high in India. The opposition Congress has also been questioning the government on the 2016 shock decision to demonetise around 85 per cent of the currency notes that were in circulation then.

The Congress has alleged the Narendra Modi government has run the country's economy into the ground. According to the Congress, the government's demonetisation exercise and the rollout of the Goods and Services Tax have greatly harmed the Indian economy.

'LIVES EASIER'

The Narendra Modi government has responded by saying that citizens' lives have become easier in the last five years, thanks to a number of the government's schemes.

These range from projects offering housing and power to all to setting up a mechanism to deal with companies (or individuals) defaulting on bank loans.

The government also prides itself on a relative 'tougher' stance with respect to Pakistan. The 2016 cross-LoC surgical strikes and the 2019 cross-border airstrike, both of which targeted terror camps in Pakistan-controlled territory, have been offered as proof of the Narendra Modi government's determination to take on Pakistan-sponsored terrorism.

WILL MODI COME BACK TO POWER?

The answer will be out on May 23, when counting begins for the seven-phase Lok Sabha election. India Today's Mood of the Nation poll, conducted in January this year, predicted a hung parliament if elections were held then.

The Narendra Modi and Amit Shah-led Bharatiya Janata Party is confident of victory in the Lok Sabha election. For India's grand old party, the Congress, it's a battle for survival.

The Congress was reduced to a historic low in the 2014 election. Rahul Gandhi, who comes from a family of three Indian prime ministers, is now at the helm of the party and is hoping to revive the party's fortunes.

Regional parties are expected to play a disruptive role in this election.

Parties such as the Samajwadi Party and Bahujan Samaj Party in Uttar Pradesh, Trinamool Congress in West Bengal, Shiv Sena in Maharashtra, All India Anna Dravida Munnetra Kazhagam (AIADMK) and Dravida Munnetra Kazhagam (DMK) in Tamil Nadu, Telangana Rashtra Samithi (TRS) in Telangana, Janata Dal (Secular) in Karnataka, and the Left may end up playing kingmakers in deciding who forms the next government in Delhi. Some of them have already allied with either the BJP or the Congress.

For PM Narendra Modi, who stormed to office on a promise of disruptive change, May 23 will be the day he knows if the five years of his rule have indeed turned the country around. The clock is ticking.
