Lok Sabha Elections 2019 HIGHLIGHTS: Parties with age old thinking cannot understand the youth of 21st century, says PM Modi

Election News HIGHLIGHTS: A huge crowd chanting ‘Vande Mataram’ marched along with Modi's cavalcade as he waved at the crowd.

Prime Minister Narendra Modi filed his nomination from Varanasi - the Parliamentary constituency he won in the 2014 general election. Leaders of the BJP, NDA and North-East Democratic Alliance including Amit Shah, Uddhav Thackeray, Nitish Kumar greeted him at the District Collectorate's office. Before heading for the nomination, Modi also offered prayers at Kashi Bhairavnath temple.

A day before his nomination, Prime Minister Modi held a massive roadshow in Varanasi. As chants of ‘Modi, Modi’ rent the air, the PM’s cavalcade traversed through Assi Ghat, Bhadaini, Sonarpura, Madanpura, Jangambadi, Godowlia before concluding at the Dashashwamedh Ghat, where he performed the evening aarti.

He was accompanied by BJP chief Amit Shah, Uttar Pradesh Chief Minister Yogi Adityanath and other top alliance leaders, in what turned out to be a show of strength aimed at demonstrating the NDA’s unity against the Opposition. The PM later tweeted that he was “grateful for the warmth and affection” shown by the people of Kashi.

A huge crowd chanting ‘Vande Mataram’ marched along with his cavalcade as he waved at the crowd. That ‘nationalism’ was the key campaign issue was clear from the songs played as the cavalcade passed through 100-odd stages erected along the route.

Priyanka Gandhi Vadra not fielded from Varanasi

Earlier in the day, Congress ended the speculation of a riveting clash between Priyanka Gandhi Vadra and the PM in Varanasi after the party fielded Ajay Rai from the temple town.

Rai had unsuccessfully contested against Modi in 2014 and finished third in the contest after the BJP leader and Aam Aadmi Party’s Arvind Kejriwal.

Arun Jaitley takes a jibe at Congress

Reacting to Congress’ decision not to field Priyanka from Varanasi, Union Minister Arun Jaitley said, “Deeply disappointed with the Congress party’s decision of not fielding Priyanka Gandhi from Varanasi. The last two months that she has been in the public life has driven home the point, ‘India has changed, dynasties don’t matter’. Her exit from the contest shows what matters.”
