Bizarre lover! Man shoots himself after girlfriend says no to night out

The accused had earlier lied to the police to mislead them. | Photo Credit: Getty Images

Mohali: A 32-year-old man allegedly shot himself on his thigh after his girlfriend refused him for a night out in Mohali. He had earlier lied to the police to mislead them. A case has been registered against the accused man who was identified as Sarabjit.

A woman, who is a resident of Dhuri, was present with Sarabjit in his car and is an eyewitness to the incident, according to a report in The Times of India. The woman, in her statement, told the police that the accused threatened to shoot himself if she did not listen to him.

Reportedly, Sarbjit was forcing the woman to come along with him outside the city for a night out. He allegedly threatened to shoot himself when she refused his demand. When the woman remained determined, he allegedly shot himself on his thigh.

Also Read: Nainital: Doctors find minor pregnant after complaints of abdominal pain, survivor accuses uncle of rape

However, Sarabjit told the police that some assailants while attempting to snatch his pistol in a park at Phase VII at around 11 pm on Friday, opened fire at him. The police doubted his version of the story as the weapon was seized from his car and if someone had attacked him to snatch his weapon, the assailant would not leave the pistol in his car before escaping.

Kuldeep Singh Chahal, Senior superintendent of police (SSP), said that the accused has been booked for endangering life or personal safety of other, possessing illegal arms and misleading the police. Sarabjit would be arrested after he gets a fitness certificate from the doctors. He is currently undergoing treatment.

Times Network - India's Leading Broadcasting Network, uniquely offering English Entertainment, best in class News channels & Bollywood Masala, available at a Value pack (7 channels) of Rs 13/- per month.

Please contact your cable/DTH service provider now and ensure that your TV viewing experience is complete. To know more click here.
