Kumaraswamy calls JDS legislature party meet on Sunday to

With the BJP predictingthe Congress-JD(S) coalition government's collapse and dissidence resurfacing in Congress, Chief Minister H D Kumaraswamy has called a meeting of JD(S) legislature party on Sunday to discuss the political developments in the state.

The meeting has been called after the Lok Sabha polls to discuss the recent political developments, party sources said.

With speculation about the longevity of the coalition government coming to the fore again and threat by rebel Congress MLA Ramesh Jarkiholi to quit the party, along with other legislators, Kumaraswamy Thursday took stock of the situation with his deputy G Parameshwara and senior Minister D K Shivakumar.

As the second phase of Lok Sabha polls drew to a close Tuesday, this speculation gained ground with state BJP chief B S Yeddyurappa predicting the coalition government's collapse after the May 23 election results.

There are talks within political circles that any adverse results for the coalition in the Lok Sabha polls,which they fought in alliance, despite resentment within amonggrass root workers and leaders of both parties, willhave its implications on the longevity of the government.

Adding to this was the threat by Jarkiholi, who hasbeen hobnobbing with BJP for some time now that he, alongwith other MLAs, would resign from the Congress soon, which has caused fear among the ruling coalition leaders as itwould trigger the numbers game in the assembly.

Meanwhile, speaking to reporters in Belagavi, Deputy Chief Minister G Parameshwara Friday said the Congress has madeefforts to reach out to Jarkiholi.

"We have been trying every day on coming to know thathe has come to Bengaluru. I tried to speak to him, but he was not available. All of us are trying.

None of us want to lose a friend like him. He too has worked for the party from the youthCongress level... we don't want to let go of him easily," he said.

Pointing out that Jarkiholi on many occasions in the past had said he would resign, Parameshwara said, "if he resigns, we will think about further action. If he does not, we will think about how to use him in the party."



If he resigns, the seat which he is representing asMLA will fall vacant, as we still have four years.Sowe willhave to fill this seat by holding by-election..we will preparefor that," he added.

There are signs that Jarkiholi is left alone, with legislators considered close to him expressing their allegiance to the Congress.

(This story has not been edited by Business Standard staff and is auto-generated from a syndicated feed.)
