IMD issues cyclonic storm warning in Andhra, Tamil Nadu, Puducherry; warns fishermen from venturing out in sea

Representational image: IMD has issued a storm warning across states of Andhra Pradesh and Tamil Nadu | Photo Credit: IANS

New Delhi: The India Meteorological Department (IMD) has issued a cyclonic storm warning in the states of Andhra Pradesh and Tamil Nadu. Fishermen have been advised not to venture out in the sea during the period, the IMD said in its forecast. Those already out in the sea have been asked to return. The IMD warned a low-pressure system over equatorial Indian Ocean and Bay of Bengal which is likely to intensify into a cyclone over the coming hours- news agency ANI cited IMD as saying.

"The depression over East Equatorial Indian Ocean and adjoining south-east Bay of Bengal has moved north-westwards with a speed of about 16 km/hr in last 03 hours and lay centred at about 1090 km east south-east of Trincomalee (Sri Lanka), 1440 km southeast of Chennai (Tamil Nadu) and 1720 km south-southeast of Machilipatnam (Andhra Pradesh). It is very likely to intensify further into a deep depression during the next 24 hours and into a Cyclonic Storm during the subsequent 12 hours," the IMD stated in its advisory.

"It is very likely to intensify further into a deep depression during the next 24 hours and into a cyclonic storm during subsequent 12 hours. It is very likely to move northwestwards off Sri Lanka coast during the next 96 hours and reach near north Tamil Nadu and south Andhra Pradesh coasts on April 30 evening," IMD said in a bulletin.

"As per present weather reports, dispersion has been formed over the equatorial Indian ocean and adjoining area of South East Bay of Bengal. In upcoming days this dispersion is going to intensify as cyclone storm and move towards the north-west direction of Tamil Nadu region and south coast of Andhra Pradesh. Due to this cyclone storm, south Andhra Pradesh and Tamilnadu are likely to receive light to moderate rainfall in upcoming two days and Telangana is going to witness High temperature up to 47 degrees in some areas and after that temperature in Telangana will normalize," D Nagaraja, scientist, IMD, Hyderabad was quoted as saying by ANI.

The met department has predicted wind speeds of 35-75 km/hr during the next week and heavy rainfall has been predicted on April 30 and May 1. Meanwhile, Puducherry Chief Minister V Narayanasamy, on Friday, held emergency meetings with officials of various departments, including disaster management.

"Puducherry is bracing itself up after the IMD issued the alert... I and ministers would fan out to different areas of Puducherry and Karaikal regions to monitor the rehabilitation and relief works. All the staff who have gone on leave should report back immediately," he was quoted as saying by PTI.
