Gen Hooda warns against growing political influence on military ops

editorial@tribune.com

Tribune News Service

Chandigarh, April 26

As the sub-continent remains strategically volatile and political fervour grips the nation amidst a general election, former General Officer commanding- in- Chief, Northern Command, Lt Gen DS Hooda cautioned against military operations being increasingly influenced by political context.

“The political context has always been there, but it is now weighing increasingly over the military and strategic perspective,” Gen Hooda, who had overseen the surgical strike across the Line of Control in 2016, said while speaking at a seminar on New Frontiers in Future Conflict today.

The seminar was organised by Western Command’s Gyan Chakra Think Tank and Chitkara University.

Touching upon the influence of public perception and popular outpourings and their ability to drive political decision making, he warned against the danger of long-term strategic plans being sacrificed at the altar of quick and visible actions.

Stating that the nature of conflict and the manner in which these are fought will keep changing, General Officer Commanding-in-Chief, Western Command, Lt Gen Surinder Singh stressed that the country possessing larger resources and having better innovations would emerge as the winner.

“At present our country is lagging behind in food availability and infrastructure and hence there is a need to have a grand strategy and define long-term goals to develop our country,” he said.

“We must focus on economic development and consequently other problems like insurgencies or social unrest will gradually do away,” he added.

Former Vice-Chief of the Army Staff Lt Gen Vijay Oberoi said the nature of warfare was changing at a fast space due to several factors such as proliferation of technology, economic development, globalisation, rise of religious fundamentalism and terrorism.

Pointing out that today, conflict is largely between states and non-state operators who have access to political, economic and social media networks, he opined that globalisation seems to have aided non-state actors more than the states.

Stressing the need to be proactive, Air Marshal JS Chauhan, former Air Officer Commanding-in-Chief, Central Air Command called for strengthening and synergising cyberwarfare and space warfare capabilities amongst the three services and more acquiring potent assets in these domains.

Giving an overview of the maritime challenges facing the country, Commodoer BR Singh cautioned against the possibility of refugees or other undesirable elements from the Indian Ocean rim settling on some of India’s island territories. Prof Rakesh Datta from Panjab University’s Department of Defence and National Security Studies delved upon non-military aspects of future conflicts. He pointed out that while India has been good tactically, it has been poor strategically.
