PM Modi's proposers: Whistleblower on baby food and Dom Raja

VARANASI: The four proposers for PM Modi were from diverse backgrounds: an agricultural scientist, a former principal of BHU’s Mahila Mahavidyalaya, an RSS worker and the chief cremator of Varanasi ghats.The PM touched the feet of the 91-year-old former principal of BHU’s Mahila Mahavidyalaya, Annapurna Shukla, who’s a retired doctor, before filing his nomination. “When Modiji came, I blessed him like a mother. I told him you identified a woman who went all the way to UK to implement Vedic research. Modiji touched my feet and I told him unche shikhar par jaaoge (You will reach the top),” said Shukla, who’s also the aunt of Amish, author of the Shiva Trilogy.Shukla, whose talent was spotted by BHU founder Madan Mohan Malviya, recalled to TOI with a twinkle in her eyes the little-known nugget that her research along with her professor’s in the UK from 1969 to 1972 led to a mandatory warning on baby food supplements in the UK that they are no replacement for mother’s milk. “Our research proved babies turn obese if denied breast milk and fed solid food. People were not aware of this.” Her PhD thesis, she told TOI, was based on the Vedic practice of ‘annaprashan’, where a newborn child is fed mother's milk for six months before solid food is introduced.Shukla’s son, documentary maker Krishna Kant said, “My maternal grandfather, a Vedic scholar, had given my mother this centuries-old shloka .” Amish said, “Buaji is an amazing woman. Traditional, polite, warm and yet strong as the rock of Gibraltar . She truly is the matriarch of our family”.The other proposer, Jadish Prakash Choudhary was teary-eyed as he said, “this is the first time the nation has recognized the profession of lighting funeral pyres. As chief cremator at the Varanasi ghats, he has inherited the legacy of mythological king Dom Raja to “liberate humans from the everlasting cycle of life and death”.“Our body is made of panch tantra. We help in the reunion with God. We have been given our due after centuries,” Choudhary said, speaking to TOI at his residence on Man Mandir Ghat, that has several tiger statues and a bull, whom they refer to as ghar ka chowkidar. “We need to support our real-life chowkidar PM Modi,” he said.RSS worker Subhash Gupta and agriculture scientist Ramakant Shukla were the other two proposers.
