Six members of Kushal gang held

Crime Investigation Agency (CIA), Palam Vihar of the Gurugram police arrested six members, including wanted criminals of the Kushal gang on Thursday. Four of the accused were arrested from Dehradun and the other two were nabbed from Gurugram’s Manesar.

The accused were involved in dozens murder cases, attempt to murder, extortion, kidnapping, loot, dacoity and activities violating the Arms Act in Gurugram and adjoining states.

Those arrested have been identified as Ranbir Saini (35) of Jhajjar, Ashu alias Hukka (26) of Pataudi, Gurugram, Sushil alias Malinga (30), Satish alias Pouva (27) of Gautambudh Nagar, Uttar Pradesh, Sumit alias Babua (23) and Gaurav alias Chintu (19) of Farrukhnagar, Gurugram.

Ranbir, a wanted criminal and was carrying a bounty of Rs 6 six lakh of which five lakh was announced by the Haryana police and 1 lakh by the Delhi police in relation to a murder case.

Saini was a parole jumper since 2009 and Ashu was also carrying a bounty of Rs 25,000 announced by the Delhi police.

According to the police following a tip-off, a team of the CIA, Palam Vihar headed by Inspector Bijendra Hudda came to know about the movements of the criminals in Dehradun and Manesar area.

“With the help of technical information and human intelligence a team of CIA Palam Vihar dispatched Dehradun to nab the alleged criminals and arrested them successfully. We had informed the local police about the hideouts of the criminals.

Another team nabbed their two accomplices from Manesar. Ranbir, Ashu, Sumit and Gaurav were arrested from Dehradun while Sushil and Satish arrested from Manesar,” Muhammad Akil, Commissioner Gurugram police said.

“The culprits allegedly threatened several businessmen in the city and adjoining state to extort money from them. They had opened fired at Harish Bakery to extort money from the owner. The accused had also threatened the owner of Pushpanjali hospital in Rewari to extort money from him,” he said.

Before their arrest, the culprits had uploaded a video on Facebook which went viral on the social media platform in which they pleaded for their life. They alleged that they wanted to surrender but the police team rounded them up and want to eliminate them.

Sources claimed that the probe team has also detained a woman who was also present in the video for further investigation. “A father of the woman has also filed a kidnapping case in Muzaffarnagar police station in Uttar Pradesh against an unknown person,” police said.

“The alleged gang members came in contact with another criminal of the Kaushal gang and joined the group to eliminate their opponents. Our different teams of CIA on their task to catch more members of the gang,” said the commissioner.

The probe team is also scanning the video which was uploaded by the criminals on the social media platform. “It is being investigated whether the video was new or old. The accused were produced before the court on Friday which sent them to police custody. Further probe into the matter is underway,” said Inspector Bijendra Hooda, in charge CIA, Palam Vihar.
