Intervention in Varanasi

PM Narendra Modi during a roadshow in Varanasi | Photo Credit: PTI

If we go by some media versions and the BJP’s own hype, the 2019 election is over and Narendra Modi just went for a victory march in Varanasi. A green carpet was laid out (a good colour for TV backdrops), rose petals were showered, temple bells rung and it was all signed, sealed and delivered. And yes, care was taken to see that the procession was shot from the right camera angles.

We are yet to find out if Modi ate mangoes and sucked the gutli in Varanasi (actor Akshay Kumar can always investigate) but according to a Kolkata daily, 1.4 lakh litres of drinking water was carried in 40 tankers to make 400 workers wash the roads of Varanasi. No matter, cleaning the roads is, according to some, as important as cleansing the soul, when it comes to our Prime Minister.

Truly, were it a presidential form of government, Narendra Modi would win hands down. His ‘Mann Ki Baat’ was shared over the past week in carefully choreographed settings such as green lawns, and the river Ganges. I must confess that some media interviews were long drawn bores but Khiladi Kumar had me choking with laughter when he said that Modi is like a sanyasi. Our Prime Minister is a ruthless practitioner of real-politick and not someone ready to give up and retire to the Himalayas.

The Varanasi trip was indeed an intervention by the PM to try and change the narrative of significant losses on the ground for the party in the nation’s most populous state. It was psychological warfare against the creeping narrative of the Grand Alliance doing well, leading to the question: Can Modi reach the 272 simple majority mark?

In Varanasi, Modi asserted his dominance in the ongoing election. But hear his words carefully and he is exhorting both the worker and the voter to not imagine that the job is done. He tells the voter: “Don’t stay away and not vote because you think he (Modi) has already won.” He warns workers against complacency and said that they should not think he “is everything”.

Five years ago when Narendra Modi first decided to descend from the heavens to land in Varanasi, he was hailed as an avatar of Shankar Bhagwan. It was a very intelligently chosen spot for him to make his intervention in the politics of India, embodying both strong leadership and the Hindu consciousness. That year, I made three long trips to Varanasi and have a long description of the campaign and atmospherics there in my book on the BJP. In it, Ashok Pandey, then one of the spokespersons of the state BJP, is quoted as saying: “We will chant Har Har Modi. He is an avatar of Shankar Bhagwan. He is, therefore, standing from every seat in India.”

Those were the “Acche Din”. Much of the choreography of the 2019 visit was similar to 2014 but with a very significant scene added. All the NDA allies trooped into Varanasi, from Nitish Kumar to Uddhav Thackeray, and Modi even touched the feet of veteran Akali Dal leader Parkash Singh Badal before filing his nomination. That was our very own ‘One Man Show’ and ‘Demolition Squad’ having a quick reality check and finding it necessary to position allies in the frame. It was an intelligent response to the unfolding possibility that in the end, it will be a coalition that will prevail. The NDA allies, therefore, were not mere extras in the prolonged Modi Varanasi show.

From now onwards, Modi and the BJP would go to some pains to remind players and opinion makers that it was the BJP’s Atal Bihari Vajpayee who ran the first successful coalition government in India’s history that completed a term. Of course, the two BJP PMs are entirely different personalities. Vajpayee became PM only because the BJP could not have come to power without coalition partners. Modi could have managed from 2014 to 2019 without them but there is no possibility of power post 2019 without the existing partners. Indeed more are likely to be required after result day on May 23.

Modi is a solo player but he is shrewd enough to adapt to circumstances and that’s possibly behind his occasional showcasing of regional parties. One thing, however, is clear. There has always been a theory floated by a section of the RSS that if the numbers were to actually come down, then Nagpur MP and Sangh favourite Nitin Gadkari could be an alternative choice to Modi. I believe that is not a realistic theory.

Since votes are being asked for Modi alone and voters are giving it to him and not the party per se, it’s difficult for the organisation to assert any other choice in the foreseeable future. The Modi cult of personality has overshadowed every other power centre in the BJP/RSS. Whatever the outcome and no matter how big or small the shortfall in numbers, it will be Modi who will make the decisions and BJP president Amit Shah who will execute them.

Saba Naqvi is a guest contributor. Views expressed are personal.
