BJP,Congress are two sides of same coin: Mehbooba

Srinagar

Peoples Democratic Party (PDP) President and former Chief Minister Mehbooba Mufti on Saturday termed Congress and the BJP two sides of the same coin and said both the parties have caused unthinkable assaults against Article 370 and 35-A from time to time.

Addressing peoples’ rallies in south Kashmir’s Devsar area, the PDP president castigated Prime Minister Narendra Modi over his remarks that Article 370 and 35-A have done maximum damage to the state. Mehbooba said that if such is the situation than it is high time for Government of India to snap ties with the Jammu and Kashmir and leave the state alone.

Terming BJP and Congress two sides of the same coin, PDP President said that it was Azad as the Chief Minister of Jammu and Kashmir who scandalously transferred thousands of kanals of land to the shrine board, undermining 370 and ignoring state’s core interests sans any remorse.

She reiterated that by tinkering with the special status of Jammu and Kashmir, the BJP is playing with fire and is turning its eyes away from reality without compunction.

She said that as the Chief Minister she had in a categoric way cautioned Prime Minister Modi that if any harm is done to the unique position of Jammu and Kashmir, PDP will break ties with the BJP without a second thought. She added that the very foundation of the agenda of the alliance was laid for the protection of 35-A and 370 and it was taken in writing from the BJP that it will not fiddle with the special position of Jammu and Kashmir in any way.

“Article 370 and 35-A is not only in the interest of Jammu and Kashmir but for the rest of the country as well. Anyone talking about scarping of JK’s special status is trying to sow seeds of discord and create new fault lines. If any harm is done to Jammu and Kashmir’s unique status, the state will erupt in the conflagration and the relation of Jammu and Kashmir with India will cease to exist,” Mehbooba said in her address.

She also flayed the government over the harsh, illegitimate and inhuman measures are being employed against the people of Kashmir with a sole objective to hoodwink the electorate in rest of the country.
