Hindustan Zindabad Tha, Zindabad Hai, Zindabad Rahega: Sunny Deol goes 'Gadar' during roadshow - WATCH

Bollywood actor Sunny Deol | Photo Credit: ANI

Barmer: Bhartiya Janata party's Gurdaspur candidate, Sunny Deol on Saturday held a massive roadshow in Rajasthan's Barmer days after he was inducted in the saffron party in presence of defence minister Nirmala Sitharaman and Railway minister Piyush Goyal.

Apart from the fact that it was his first roadshow for the BJP, what was striking was the fact that movie dialogues were blared out of speakers, while the actor threw fists in the air, a sign mostly used by the PM Modi and party president Amit Shah during rallies.

All the dialogues, including the "Tareekh pe Tareekh" from Damini to the iconic "Hindustan zindabad tha, zindabad hai, zindabad rahega" were used during the roadshow to win over the crowd. Going by the sheer strength and the enthusiasm of the people in the video, it seems Sunny Deol achieved what he set out to through the roadshow.

#WATCH Barmer: Sunny Deol holds his first roadshow after joining BJP, campaigns for BJP LS candidate from Barmer, Kailash Choudhary. Dialogue from the movie 'Gadar', "Hindustan Zindabad tha, zindabad hai, zindabad rahega" heard in the background #Rajasthan #LokSabhaElections2019 pic.twitter.com/OjVXPJRJkU — ANI (@ANI) April 27, 2019

Sunny Deol was campaigning for Kailash Choudhary, the BJP's Lok Sabha candidate from Barmer. Sunny himself is contesting from Punjab's Gurdaspur - a seat that was earlier held by another iconic actor Vinod Khanna.

Vinod Khanna had won the seat four times before it fell vacant due to his demise in 2017. His wife made a strong claim for the seat expressing desire to contest publically but the saffron party went for Sunny Deol. Interestingly neither Khanna nor Deol is a native of Gurdaspur. Khanna was born in Peshawar and Deol belongs to Ludhiana district.

On Friday, Captain Amarinder Singh had termed Sunny a "filmy fauji" while asserting that Congress' Sunil Jakhar - who's contesting against Deol - has no threat from the Bollywood actor.

Calling Deol an "ageing actor whose acting career was over", Amarinder said that in Indian politics “people like him will come and go”.


