Minorities at the cross-roads or have the majority been made directionless?

Sunil Kumar is currently member, managing committee, Ramakrishna Mission, New Delhi. An engineer and project manager trained at Vickers Armstrong Engineers and Babcox & Wilcox, UK, he is a former general manager of The Projects and Equipment Corporation of India, Ministry of Commerce and Consultant, NIDC, Ministry of Industry. Sunil has been member of a high-power government committee for value orientation in Planning Commission and In-charge of Value Education Programmes of Ramakrishna Mission, New Delhi. He has written books on Vedanta, managerial effectiveness – Indian Insights, human values, etc. His passion lies in applying Indian wisdom & Vivekananda’s principles to managerial situations. His vision and managerial expertise led to the setting up of a unique PGDBM Management Institute in Delhi, called SriSIM, of which he was a Founder Trustee and Professor and which offered education in Indian ethos based Management. He is currently taking the message of Vedanta-centric human development to public servants through programs on ‘Ethics in Governance. LESS ... MORE

Should we fear a Majoritarian Govt.? During the last general elections, for the first time in many decades, a ‘new’, majority govt. of a different, so called majoritarian or Hindutva mindset has come into limelight and power. It is election time again and the media, the educated elite and the leaders who were in power so long, are creating the narrative that all our Institutions and the Minorities are under threat because of a Majoritarian Govt.

Can Hinduism be a threat to Minorities and Institutions? On the face of it the statement is apparently absurd because it is universally acknowledged and historically accepted that traditionally Hinduism, the majority religion of Bharat, is the most tolerant of all religious faiths. It is also a historical fact that wherever and whenever Islam and Christianity reach, their agenda is to establish their hegemony and destroy the indigenous religious cultures! As an indigenous President of Africa, said “When the White man came, we had all the lands and they had the Bible. They taught us to pray with eyes closed. When we opened our eyes, they had all our lands and we had the Bible”! The problem is that we allow minorities to teach their narrow limiting and divisive idea ‘One-God, One-Scripture’ but fail to scatter broadcast the idea of Bharat of ‘One-God but Many-Scriptures’, many ways to worship that one God.

It is only Hinduism and Bharatiya samskriti which welcomes all religions because it is based on the universal worldview of “Oneness” of Vedanta, which does not talk of ‘my religion’ versus ‘your religion’. Bharat believes that all religions, all saints, all Prophets and God-men, inspire us to become good and better towards a common ‘best’ in and thru’ our daily work and life. It is not a matter of belief or belonging to this or that Religion that matters. It is not Religions that are good or bad. It all depends upon the preachers, individuals, elders of community, who can either help or obstruct our growth and expansion towards Perfection. The essence of religions is to establish us in self-development processes so that we can know what is good and develop the strength to do what is good and self-control to avoid the bad.

What is the real threat? Not teaching all citizens, this idea of ‘becoming good and better towards the best’, is the biggest threat to Institutions and to our progress as a nation. Unfortunately, becoming ‘good’ is not a part of Schooling! It is the failure of India and of govt’s in power to create appropriate schooling to make us ‘good’ and unite us as a Bharatiya! Our freedom fighters had love for India, its ideals and its people and they had a shared vision of India but ever since Independence, modern education and governance and our political leaders have failed to create a common identity of what being an Indian means and we remain divided.

Schooling has failed to teach us our own Vedantic wisdom, the worldview of “Oneness” and that being a Bharati literally means “Striving for the highest Perfection in and thru’ our daily working and living”. Schooling has failed to focus on principles, values and ideals which unite us as a nation. It has failed to instil in us love for India and all its people. In a way Hindutva appears to have emerged to counter the narrative of modern religions which claim that their way, their scripture and their Masters alone are right and so they have the mandate of converting non-believers to their faith! Since schooling has not taught us the wisdom of “Oneness’, we’re ignorant of our own Bharatiya samskriti, we wrongly link Hindutva with Hinduism and in the name of ‘secularism’, for appeasement of minorities and for vote-bank politics, we’re afraid of teaching this healthy worldview of Vedanta to even our own citizens.

Our failure is that we’ve not allowed the spirit of ‘oneness’ to be taught while allowing the minorities to teach their narrow ideas in their minority schooling. The result is that education has failed to instil in us the spirit of being an enlightened citizen, proud to be an Indian, and as citizens we’ve failed to imbibe the spirit of brotherhood and become one nation.

Empathy is a product of spiritual awakening but Schooling ignores it: ‘Love thy neighbour as thyself’. Why? Because ‘Each soul is potentially Divine’; ‘Kingdom of God is within’. UNESCO have also asked the academia of the whole world to promote ‘Learning to Live Together’; ‘Learning the Way of Peace’; ‘Learning to be’; ‘Learning the Treasure within’, but schooling focuses only on IQ, 3R’s, etc.

Even though the idea that ‘as spirit we’re one interconnected, interrelated, whole’, is the most fundamental of all truths and the very basic foundation of the composite culture of ‘India that is Bharat’, governance has failed to include teaching of this fundamental reality and love for Bharat and its ideal of oneness as an integral and compulsory part of our education and schooling. The Govt. in power since independence have ignored the directions of Vivekananda, Gandhiji in his Hind Swaraj, Supreme Court, Planning Commission, and Fundamental Duties of our Constitution, all of whom enjoin on us to teach the composite culture and basic fundamentals of all religions.

Purpose of Schooling – to be established in Ethical Conduct: Wisdom of Bharat is very clear. Thru’ Dharma earn and enjoy to remain on the path to ‘mukti, perfection’. It is only thru’ ethical conduct for all citizens, that we can develop Empathy. And therefore, it is important that Schools create responsible citizens who have been established in righteous-ethical-conduct so that they can help create and govern a societal Code of Ethics. Maybe Hindutva can expand itself towards the idea of “Oneness” as espoused by the Vedanta of Bharat.

Facebook Twitter Linkedin Email Disclaimer Views expressed above are the author's own.
