Maharashtra elections: 'BJP-Sena alliance went through a bad patch, now we've realised ...'

Chief minister

has completed a century by addressing more than 100 election rallies across

and Gujarat during the Lok Sabha polls. Fadnavis is all set to join the BJP's campaign in the fifth phase of the general elections in Madhya Pradesh and Uttar Pradesh. At close of campaigning in the state, he expressed confidence that at the national level and in Maharashtra, BJP would improve its tally over 2014. Speaking to

TOI

, Fadnavis admitted that the

with the Sena went through a rough patch, for which both paid "a heavy price", but he said things were looking up for the allies now. Excerpts:

Q: How do you assess the political situation?

Q: How do you see voting patterns in 2014 and now?

Q: A month before the elections, there was a public spat between BJP and Shiv Sena leaders.

Q: Are members of the minority and dalit communities unhappy with the performance of the government?

Q: BJP nominated a terror suspect Pragya Singh Thakur who made statements against a martyred police officer.

Q: In 2014, BJP had promised to take stringent action against corrupt politicians.

Q: Raj Thackeray has launched a campaign against your government, and he is drawing huge crowds.

Q: Congress and NCP are saying that Prakash Ambedkar is the B-team of the BJP

Q: BJP has fielded a large number of imported candidates.

Q: When will Radhakrishna Vikhe Patil join BJP?

A: In 2014, there was a Modi wave. Now, there are strong undercurrents in favour of Prime Minister Narendra Modi. If we look at the unprecedented response to his rallies and that too despite the scorching sun, I am sure BJP will set new records. It will get a clear majority on its own. In Maharashtra we will win more than 42 seats.A: If we look at voting patterns in 2014 and 2019, they are almost identical. In the first phase in 2014, polling percentage stood at 63%; in 2019, it is similar. In the second and third phases too, they were similar, and in this phase too, it appears there will be no change. In 2014, the entire middle class was with the BJP, now even the lower middle class and poorer sections of the society are impressed by our performance.A: It was a bad patch in the more than three-decade-long alliance of the the BJP and Shiv Sena. It should not have happened. After the 2014 Lok Sabha elections, both BJP and Shiv Sena paid a heavy price for snapping the alliance. Now, we have realised we must stay together, we have started on a clean slate.A: I do not think so. In the last five years, both my government as well as the government at the Centre have implemented all schemes for the welfare of minorities in letter and spirit. Maharashtra did not witness a single riot. We have ensured safety of all communities. A section of the opposition tried to create an impression about the government but it has not succeeded.A: Hemant Karkare was a brave and upright officer, we don't endorse Sadhvi Pragya's comments on him. She has also apologised for it. But I think the debate over her nomination has died down.A: We are determined to take stern action against corrupt politicians. In the irrigation scam, the affidavit filed by the Anti-Corruption Bureau confirms the role of both Ajit Pawar and Sunil Tatkare. A chargesheet has been filed against the contractor. Pawar and Tatkare had taken the view that they approved the proposal as it was signed by the secretary of the department. In my opinion, mistakes are made once or twice, but in the present case, there appears to be a pattern. Politicians and bureaucrats were acting hand in glove. We will fix responsibility.A: He is a good orator, but we do not think that it will have an adverse impact on the BJP. He is a non-player. He's not a candidate nor is his party contesting the elections. To a certain extent, we have taken note of his allegations and countered them.A: That is false. Congress and NCP leaders are saying this because they could not forge an alliance with Ambedkar. In certain constituencies, Ambedkar has put up strong candidates, posing a threat to Congress-NCP nominees.A: It's not just BJP. All parties have fielded outsiders. These are political decisions and electoral adjustments. In my view, there is nothing wrong if we put up a new candidate who accepts our ideology.A: His son Sujay has joined us, now Vikhe has to decide. If he approaches us, we will consider the proposal.
