Family cries foul as inmate dies in custody in Kota

An ailing jail inmate died in police custody at a hospital in Rajasthan's Kota town on Friday night after the police guards accompanying him allegedly assaulted him.

Two of the policemen were shunted out after the family members of the deceased protested outside the mortuary

Mohammed Ramzan, 60, a resident of Baran district's Mangrol, was serving a sentence in the district jail He was shifted to the New Medical College Hospital in Kota for treatment, when he complained of pain.

A video that surfaced before Mr. Ramzan’s death, shows him telling that three police guards had beaten him with metal pipes, corroborating his family’s version of him being tortured to death.

Ramzan was admitted to Sawai Man Singh Government Hospital in Jaipur from April 21 to 25 for treatment when his condition deteriorated. The family, which met him once in Jaipur, was informed that the patient had been transferred back to Kota, where he died in the prisoners ward at the New Medical College Hospital.

Video evidence

He said - in the video recorded by a family member during his treatment in Jaipur - the guards were inebriated and would thrash him when he cried in pain.

The family members alleged the jail authorities did not give proper medical treatment to Ramzan when he fell sick. The deceased also faced communal slur, according to the family.

Police assure inquiry

After the family members, accompanied by the Social Democratic Party of India (SDPI) members staged a protest and refused to accept the body, Kota Superintendent of Police Deepak Bhargava assured them of an inquiry by the Judicial Magistrate. The post-mortem was conducted by a medical board and the body handed over to the family.

The People's Union for Civil Liberties (PUCL) has shot off a petition to the National Human Rights Commission demanding registration of an FIR against the police guards allegedly involved in custodial violence that led to Ramzan's death. It also sought an inquiry by the hospital into violence in the prisoners' ward and payment of compensation to the deceased’s family.

‘Communally targeted violence’ alleged

PUCL-Rajasthan president Kavita Srivastava said the “communally targeted violence” by the authorities amounted to violation of human rights of persons of minority communities lodged in various correctional institutions across the country.
