LETTERS TO THE EDITOR

Mamata’s Unpleasant And Scathing Remarks at PM

Stung by Prime Minister Narendra Modi’s revelation of her sweet rapport with him at the personal level, Mamata Banerjee on Friday declared that West Bengal would gift him clay-made rasagullas. She angrily said, “What will be the rasgulla type? It will not be a regular one. We will make the sweet with clay and fill it with gravel exactly the way cashew nuts and raisins are put in Laddoos so that when he tries to have a bite, his teeth will break. This type of sweet will be served to him.” Intemperate and incisive speech of West Bengal Chief Minister Mamata Banerjee has stirred up a real hornets’ nest. Throwing even political maryada to the wind, she spoke like a fisherwoman. The speech was pregnant with disparaging remarks, which should have been avoided if she had believed in political etiquette. The flipside of the speech was that it would have a negative impact on the minds of the suckers of the party and it would further enhance and accelerate enmity and animosity which would further escalate murder politics. It is therefore good for Trinamool Congress Party to restrain Mamata from hitting out at Narendra Modi or other leaders in a rather unpleasant and caustic way. She can criticize him in the acceptable standard. But this kind of remark on Modi should have been avoided, and whatever she speaks must come out of profundity.

T K NANDANAN, KOCHI

Build Basic Minimum Infrastructure

World’s largest democracy’s vote is unique in many ways, it divides family, friend becomes foes and the enemy becomes strange bedfellows. The glaring examples are cousins Raj and Uddhav Thackeray are thus on opposite ends of the spectrum with respect to the BJP. During 2014 general election, Raj Thackeray was a staunch Narendra Modi follower, but now Raj Thackeray fact-checks of his claims, deploying — videos “Ae lav re toh video (hey play the video)”, to expose Modi’s claims. It seems that Raj Shrikant Thackeray, founder of Maharashtra Navnirman Sena is not against Modi, but he only states things that are not acceptable is like: Bullet Train, which according to him, Marathi and Gujrati people do not want it. Instead the basic minimum infrastructure should be fulfilled. Beside, lands of farmers are acquired compulsorily for highways but they are not getting adequate compensation. Curtail of media’s freedom but above all PM Modi should not forget that he is the country’s Prime minister but not of Gujarat.

Bidyut K ChatterJee, Faridabad

Changing Society

If incidents leading up to this general election are any indication, they may well signify the coming of age of the Indian voter. For long harangued by the tribe of glib talkers, the aam aadmi is slowly but surely asserting himself, and very emphatically at that. Refusing to take things lying down, he has made it more than obvious that he would not cringe from confronting the law-makers when it comes to the denial of his basic needs. Hence it did take the election commission some time to reconcile when villagers from two remote hamlets of the state threatened to boycott the Lok Sabha polls if their long-pending grievances were not resolved immediately. In the war of ballots, the electorate usually endorses a candidate depending on the sincerity of his commitments. Pledges have had a way of enamoring the public, but smarting under the weight of their own promises, leaders of late have come to understand the futility of such exercises that only serves to hold amusement value during election campaigns. Call it a politically conscience body of voters or one that has come to see through the fabric of lies that gives modern politics the intricacy associated with it, people would like to have their leaders more involved and dedicated to the cause of their voters. One could well be witnessing the nation’s first step towards ‘demanding’ accountability from its elected members. Answerable for their deeds, as also their misdemeanors, isn’t it about time a system of checks and balances is introduced in the public domain which empowers the electorate to limit the obtrusiveness of the elected members in the affairs of the constituency in as far as the personal interests of the representative, and not public welfare, gains prominence. Braving their disabilities, the manner in which the infirm and the differently abled members have come out in large numbers to exercise their franchise this time signifies a changing society which does not believe in sitting back and allowing the political class to steer the course of the nation.

PACHU MENON, Margao
