The Shillong Times

Security guard kills six-year old, rapes corpse in Uttarakhand

Haridwar: In a shocking incident, a security guard of a poultry farm allegedly killed a six-year-old girl and then raped her corpse in Shyampur area, police said on Sunday. SSP Office PRO Anurodh Kumar said the girl had gone missing on Friday when she was playing with other children at her hutment. Police investigation revealed that she was lured to the forest adjoining Chidiyapur village by the security guard, Sonu, who worked at the poultry farm nearby, the official said. Her parents, who were daily wage labourers from Bijnore, were working in a field when the incident took place. Sonu strangulated the girl when she started to scream. After she died, he raped her barely 600 metres from the spot where her parents were, the official said. He was arrested soon after the girl’s body was recovered from the forest on Saturday morning, Kumar said, adding he has confessed to the crime. The accused has been taken on 14 days’ police remand. (PTI)

Clash over love affair, 4 hurt

Muzaffarnagar (UP): A suspected love affair in Bhangela village here led to a clash between two families in which those from the girl’s side attacked four persons with stones, leaving them critically injured, police said Sunday. The girl’s lover was among the four assaulted on Saturday, Station House Officer (SHO), Khatoli, Harsharan Sharma said. A case was registered against Meherchand, his wife Kamlesh, his brother Nehal and a relative identified as Kanti — all family members of the girl, he said. While Meherchand and his wife were arrested, efforts are on to trace the other accused, the SHO said. The injured were rushed to a hospital, Sharma added. (PTI)

Srinagar-Leh highway re-opens

Zojila (JK): The 434-km strategic Srinagar-Leh National Highway, connecting Kashmir valley with the Ladakh region, was thrown open for traffic on Sunday after being closed for over four months due to heavy snowfall. The highway was opened by Lt Gen K J S Dhillon, General Officer Commanding of 15 Corps, along with other officials, at a ceremony in Zero-Point here. The strategic road was closed for traffic in mid-December last year due to heavy accumulation of snow from Gagangir in Ganderbal district to Drass in Kargil district. Zojila Pass, at a height of 11,516 feet above sea level, connects the picturesque Kashmir valley with the cold Indus Valley desert through the 434 km long Srinagar-Leh Road. Officials said the snow clearance operation was undertaken by the Border Road Organisation under Project Beacon from Gagangir to Zero Point (33 km from 75 km marker to 108 km). (PTI)

Minister’s condition improves

Raipur: Senior Congress leader and Chhattisgarh agriculture minister Ravindra Choubey’s health has improved, Head of Cardiology Department in PGI Lucknow Pravin Kumar Goya informed on Sunday. Choubey suffered a mild heart attack in Lucknow on Saturday morning. He has been in Uttar Pradesh to campaign for his party in the ongoing Lok Sabha elections. Dr Goyal said that condition of Choubey was critical when he was brought to PGI Lucknow following heart attack. But after 24 hours of treatment his condition has improved. He is conscious and is talking to everybody. His blood pressure too is well under control, he said. Goyal also added that Choubey have some problems in his liver and kidney. Despite improvement in his condition it will take some more time for him to recover from illness, he said. (UNI)

Heatwave warning for two days

Mumbai: The IMD has issued a heat wave warning for North Madhya (Central) Maharashtra and Marathwada regions for Sunday and Monday. It also said that Marathwada region would receive thunderstorm accompanied by lightning and gusty winds. Nashik, Pune, Ahmednagar and Jalgaon districts would witness a heat wave along with warm night conditions, the India Meteorological Department (IMD) stated in a report released this afternoon. The trough from the above cyclonic circulation to south Konkan now runs across Marathwada and Madhya Maharashtra, it stated. There is no warning of a heatwave for south Konkan and South Madhya Maharashtra for Monday. (PTI)

22

Doda (J-K): A 35-year-old man was killed and two women were critically injured Sunday when the car they were travelling in skidded off the road and rolled down into a gorge here, police said. The accident occurred near Dunadi village in the district when the car was travelling from Gandoh to Doda on the Thathri-Kilhotran road, they said. The driver, Abdul Latief, lost control over the vehicle while passing a curve and the car rolled down the hill and fell on a mud house near the banks of a river, leaving him dead and critically injuring two passengers – Rozia Bano and Zohra Begum — who were rushed to a hospital, police said. The roof of the mud-house suffered extensive damages in the mishap but its occupants escaped unhurt, an official said. (PTI)
