Rajnath not taking chances

Despite the opposition parties having fielded lightweight candidates against him, Union Home Minister and BJP candidate from Lucknow, Rajnath Singh, is not taking any chances and is carrying out electioneering at full throttle.

Even his wife and two sons are holding election meetings asking people to vote for Singh.

“This is election. You cannot take anyone lightly. Whoever has filed the nomination paper is contesting election and can win. This candidate may be from a recognised political party or an independent. He is my opponent and I consider him as my political rival,” Singh told this reporter on the sidelines of a meeting held at Indira Nagar here on Sunday.

The SP-BSP alliance has fielded Poonam Sinha, wife of cine star Shatrughan Sinha who after deserting BJP has joined the Congress. On the other hand, Congress has fielded Acharya Pramod Krishnam. Both the candidates are considered lightweight in comparison to Singh and the victory of the BJP candidate is considered a foregone conclusion.

Singh, however, does not see the contest as a walkover. “Please do not spread this otherwise people will not come out to vote. Every election is a contest because it is a big festival of democracy. People should take part in the festival. My appeal to the people is to register a record polling this time in Lucknow,” he said.

Law Minister Brajesh Pathak, who accompanies Singh, said that this election was not a question of victory as they were targeting the biggest ever margin of victory in Lucknow this time.

“All the BJP workers, up to the booth level, are working in this direction,” Pathak said and added, “The roadshow of Rajnathji before filing nomination was a testimony of things to come as people from all caste, creed and religion took part in it.”

Singh listens to Pathak with intent and smiles and then that BJP workers are going to the people with my report card and telling them what he has done as member of Parliament for Lucknow.

“Even I am telling them what my future programmes are, including two flyovers whose construction has started.

The next minute he starts talking about Metro, Outer Ring Road, flyover over Kukrail nullah and the sewage treatment plants (STPs) as his achievements. Then he looks at Diwakar Tripathi, his representative in Lucknow, and asks, “Kuchh chhoot to nahi gaya?”

The campaigning so far has been very decent in Lucknow. No personal attacks have been made so far. Shatrughan Sinha is a close friend of Rajnath Singh and he had sought votes for him when he was in BJP. “It is my principle that I do not use foul language against any leader. There is a decorum which should be maintained in political and social life,” Singh said.

On Sunday, Rajnath Singh held a series of public meetings, including a meeting of Chitransh Mahasabha, in Indira Nagar area of Lucknow. “I have come here to ask people to vote on May 6. No one should be complacent,” he said.

BJP corporator and main organiser of the meeting, Dilip Srivastava, assured Singh that booth level workers would ensure record polling in Lucknow this time.

Earlier, Singh met traders of Uttar Pradesh Adarsh Vyapar Mandal and the traders assured all support to BJP in general and Singh in particular.

Polling in Lucknow will be held on May 6.
