Pranay Murder Case: Accused Out On Bail, Victim’s Family Seeks Security

Warangal: The Telangana High Court on Friday granted conditional bail to three accused in the Honour-Killing case of the 24 year-old dalit youth Perumalla Pranay, who was hacked to death in September 2018.

The accused T Maruthi Rao, hsi brother T Shravan and another accused Abdul Karim, a Congress leader were released from Warangal Central Jail on Sunday following High Court orders. The Warangal Jail authorities after examining the Court Bail Orders released the three of them at 8.20 am in the morning.

Pranay's family and his wife Amrutha, who had been fighting for justice had opposed the bail to the five accused including her father T Maruthi Rao, uncle T Shravan, Asghar Ali, Abdul Karim and S Shiva in the case. They had earlier filed a case under the Preventive Detention Act (PD) against the accused when the case was registered.

The accused had filed for a bail petition two months ago, but it was rejected by the High Court. The three of them had again filed a petition and this time the High Court granted bail to the three of them as they felt that there was no provable threat from them if they were released.

Warangal district SP Ranganath and Miryalaguda DSP K Srinivasulu said that the government would challenge the conditional bail granted by the High Court to the accused in the Supreme Court.

Security Threat to Pranay's family

Balaswamy, father of Pranay said that they were at risk of being harmed by Maruthi Rao. It may be recollected that Amrutha had given birth to a baby a few months ago. Balaswamy feels that if Maruthi Rao comes out on bail there is every possibility of him trying to eliminate them so that no one can fight the case against him.

The family are planning to approach the District Superintendent of Police, the Collector and local DSP seeking protection from Maruthi Rao. Armutha said that giving bail to the accused will be perceived as an encouragement to others that it's easy to by pass laws and that they can get away with such crimes.

Akhila Bharatha Dalits Rights Federation

New Delhi: Meanwhile the Akhila Bharatha Dalits Rights Federation has demanded that the Telangana government provide security to Pranay's family. The Federation President Ananda Rao on Sunday said that with Amrutha's father getting bail, there is a threat to the lives of Pranay's family and Amrutha. He said that it was the Government's responsibility to ensure that adequate security be deployed for the family so that they are not harmed by the accused.

Also Read: Pranay Murder Case: HC Grants Bail To Key Accused

Pranay, a Dalit youth was hacked to death in September last year as he was coming out of a hospital in Miryalguda town of Nalgonda district along with his wife Amrutha, with whom he had an inter-caste marriage. Amrutha and Pranay had married in January 2018 against the wishes of her father T Maruthi Rao, a businessman who was from a higher caste upper caste.
