Katrina Kaif talks about her break up with Ranbir Kapoor, says ‘I had to take full responsibility for my part’

Follow us on Image Source : INSTAGRAM Katrina Kaif talks about her break up with Ranbir Kapoor

Katrina Kaif opened up about her break with actor Ranbir Kapoor last year after keeping mum for the longest time. When the actress performed as Babita Kumari in her last film Zero, it was said that she re-lived her break up with Ranbir Kapoor in the film. Now, the actress has admitted that Babita Kumari is a character that has come out of her real life. Talking to Mumbai Mirror about her roles and especially about the film Zero, she said, “Everything that I bring to my work comes out of my life’s experiences. I try to find a way to connect it with something I have seen, heard or something someone around me has faced.”

Katrina added, “I had to break before I could proceed to rebuild myself. I had to unravel and feel everything that had happened...I had to take full responsibility for my part in the equation, what I could and should have done better and accept that the parts I was not responsible for were not my problem,” adding, “One thought that helped me when I was at my lowest was something my mom told me: ‘So many women and girls go through the same thing, you feel you are alone but you are not.’”

Talking about love and relationships, Katrina said that it is beautiful to be in love but make sure that nobody else has the right to your identity. “I am not saying be guarded in love. No, love with all your heart. Being in a relationship is beautiful and I have a lot to give to a person. But I now know that nobody else gives you your identity,” Katrina Kaif elaborated.

After earning accolades for her role of Babita Kumar in Zero, Katrina Kaif is alls et to set the screens on fire with her next performance in Salman Khan starrer Bharat. Refuting the rumours that she has got the role in the film because of her friendship with Salman Khan, Katrina revealed to Mid Day, “I read the script from start to finish in three hours and immediately called him to tell him that I loved it. I realised there was an opportunity of going the extra mile with this character. So, it had nothing to do with my friendship with Salman or Ali. In fact, Salman did not even call me after I signed the film. We met directly on the set.”,

On the work front, Katrina Kaif is loaded with Bollywood projects. Other than Salman Khan and Ali Abbas Zafar’s Bharat, Katrina will be seen in Akshay Kumar starrer Sooryavanshi.
