Cyclone 'Fani' likely to make landfall over south India: Here's what we know so far

LIVE updates of Cyclone Nivar (tracking). The very severe cyclonic storm has made landfall along the Tamil Nadu-Puducherry coast

A deep depression over the southeast Bay of Bengal developed into cyclonic storm 'Fani' on April 27, which will further intensify into a "severe cyclonic storm", the IMD has warned.

According to the Cyclone Warning Division of the Indian Meteorological Department (IMD), Cyclone Fani is very likely to reach near the coasts of north Tamil Nadu and south Andhra Pradesh by the evening of April 30.

Here's what we know so far about the cyclonic storm:

> According to the IMD, "At 05:30 hours on April 29, 'Fani' lay centred at about 880 km southeast of Chennai and 1050 km south-southeast of Machilipatnam", which is in Andhra Pradesh.

> While there is still no clarity as to where 'Fani' will make a landfall, officials indicated that it may hit the coast near north coastal Andhra on May 2 or 3.

> Heavy falls at isolated places are very likely over Kerala on April 29 and 30.

> The IMD has warned that the sea along the coasts of Sri Lanka, Tamil Nadu and Andhra Pradesh is likely to be "very rough" from April 28, and fishermen have been advised not to venture out into the seas.

> The Hindu reported that the cyclone's landfall over Tamil Nadu and Andhra Pradesh has been ruled out, but the IMD is closely monitoring a possibility of its landfall over Odisha.

> The Odisha government, on its part, has asked district collectors and departments concerned to remain alert and take necessary measures in advance.

> The National Disaster Response Force (NDRF) and Indian Coast Guard have been put on high alert, and placed at the disposal of the state governments concerned.



Spoke to officials regarding the situation arising due to Cyclone Fani. Asked them to take preventive measures and be prepared to provide all possible assistance. Also urged them to work closely with Governments of the affected states.

Praying for everyone's safety and wellbeing.

— Chowkidar Narendra Modi (@narendramodi) April 29, 2019

> Prime Minister Narendra Modi has also asked officials to take "preventive measures and be prepared to provide all possible assistance."

> Cyclone Fani has been named by Bangladesh.

(With PTI inputs)
