Odisha, Kerala on high alert as Cyclone Fani to intensify into very severe storm

Cyclone Fani (pronounced ‘Foni’) is expected to become "extremely severe" in the next 24 hours, according to IMD. (Photo: IMD)

Cyclone Fani (pronounced 'Foni') has intensified into a severe cyclonic storm, following which several states across southern India have issued an alert as the cyclonic storm is expected to turn "extremely severe" by Thursday.

While heavy rainfall is expected across Kerala and Odisha, light to moderate rainfall is expected in many other states including Andhra Pradesh, Tamil Nadu, and West Bengal.

Armed forces are currently on scramble alert for emergency response as cyclone Fani. Indian Navy, Indian Air Force, and Army relief teams are also on standby for rapid response.

Armed forces on scramble alert for emergency response during #CycloneFani. Could hit Odisha. Standard operating procedure for cyclone response now active -- @IndianNavy aircraft & rescue units, @IAF_MCC aircraft and Army relief teams on stand-by for rapid response. pic.twitter.com/VTgfBvkHXY Shiv Aroor (@ShivAroor) April 29, 2019

In its latest bulletin, the Indian Meteorological Department (IMD) said the storm over southeast Bay of Bengal and neighbourhood is around 810 km from east-southeast Chennai (Tamil Nadu) and 950 km from south-southeast of Machilipatnam (Andhra Pradesh).

It also suggested that the cyclonic storm is "very likely" to move northwest-wards till May 1 and gradually move towards coastal areas in Odisha. Both Odisha and Kerala are on high alert as heavy rainfall is also expected in these regions starting Thursday.

While the cyclonic storm is not expected to make landfall in Tamil Nadu, light to heavy rainfall is expected in the state. Earlier, the IMD had issued warning to fishermen along the coasts of Sri Lanka, Tamil Nadu, Andhra Pradesh, and Puducherry to not venture into the sea over the next few days.

Unlike other states, heavy rainfall is expected in Kerala and Odisha after Cyclone Fani intensified. Both IMD and the State Emergency Operations Centre (SEOC) have sounded warnings about looming gusty winds and heavy rainfall in the state for the next two days.

Meanwhile, heavy rain is also expected across parts of West Bengal from May 3. Strong winds are also expected from May 1 evening in north Tamil Nadu, Puducherry, and south Andhra Pradesh coasts.

Sea conditions are also likely to get "very rough" across Puducherry, Tamil Nadu, and south Andhra Pradesh coasts till May 1.

Spoke to officials regarding the situation arising due to Cyclone Fani. Asked them to take preventive measures and be prepared to provide all possible assistance. Also urged them to work closely with Governments of the affected states.

Praying for everyone's safety and wellbeing. Chowkidar Narendra Modi (@narendramodi) April 29, 2019

People living in coastal areas in Kerala and Lakshadweep have also been asked to stay clear of the beaches as Indian National Centre for Ocean Information Services (INCOIS) has predicted high sea-waves in the range of 1.5 to 2.2 meters till 11:30 pm on April 30.

The latest bulletin of the IMD also showed that the cyclonic storm has been moving at a speed of 18 km/hour since the last six hours.

In the wake of the looming cyclonic threat, the IAF and BrahMos Aerospace have put their plans to testfire the air-launched version of the BrahMos missile on hold.

The testfire has been postponed due to the cyclone storm 'Fani' for the moment but we will be doing it soon, government sources said here.
