The Gita does not support racism

The Gita does not support racism

THE EDITOR: The Bhagavad Gita does not support clannishness, tribalism. The Gita, one of the newest testaments, in the rich celestial history of ancient India, does not support racism. The following are five of the key precepts of this revered text:

First, the Gita subordinates devotion to the clan to devotion to duty. In the opening verse of the Gita, Arjuna, the warrior, weeps. Should I, he cries in despair, fight a war against my revered clansman, my cousins, their sages, their masters of war? The final injunction that Krishna, the God, offers is to fight. Do thy duty. To fight and destroy the iniquitous clansmen. Duty to fight for righteousness must trump tribal loyalty.

If you forego this fight for righteousness, would not the inheritors of the land, your very enemies, mock, scoff at you? What authority could you possess, to fight other kingdoms, principalities, powers, parties, if you refuse to fight your own clan, when they are in error?

Second, fight not for a reward, but for the sake of duty. For the ultimate reward in not in the mundane, transient, visible world, but in the world of the spirit. Of what use is the monetary remuneration, the award, the gift, the bribe, the kickback and deal, when the spirit is sick, drugged, embalmed in maya, delusion? When the soul of the nation, the party, the tribe is sick?

Third, by sacrifice and prayer you will receive successful outcomes. It is possible to move the cosmos, achieve large political, economic, revolutionary outcomes, through deep sacrifice and prayers. When the institutions of society have become weak, encumbered or compromised, when individuals become weak and betraying, turning to the cosmos brings large and successful outcomes. The work of the cosmos seems slow, but at the appointed hour, it moves with devastating power and precision.

Fourth, offer up a leaf, or flower, or drop of water in thanks, daily, continually, to the great moving cosmos. Did not the cosmos, the sun, the planet rise this morning, to work and sweat for our succour, our survival? What is it to offer up a little leaf, flower, drop of water? Even the ordinary person may, with inexpensive gifts, offer thanks; and move the cosmos.

Fifth, let not the unwise disturb the mind or work of the wise. Do thy duty, do not waver. Do not let the troll, the Facebook sniper, the scurrilous, the imp, the imposter, the betrayer, the unbeliever, the faint-hearted, the short of faith, the frothing and fuming nemesis, the Iago, those lacking in cosmic knowledge distract from the course of consecrated action.

Our holy books tell it all. The Old and New Testaments, the Koran, the Talmud; even Shakespeare. Narratives of belief and unbelief, exile and fightback, faith and victory, sacrifice and conquest; and the tragic flaws in leaders followed by chaos and, finally, the redemption of the body politic.

The Ramayana and the Mahabharata, the narrative embodiments of the precepts of the Gita, tell the story of theft. Theft and the exile of the faithful from their legacies, lands, kingdoms. A handful of leaders and their believers stood up against this theft, which was based on tricks, schemes, wiles and the most vile and violent forms of deception, and saved the land, gave light to darkness.

WAYNE KUBLALSINGH via e-mail
