Supreme Court Sets Aside MCA Order on Merger of FTIL (63 Moons Technologies) and NSEL

The Supreme Court on Tuesday set aside the 2016 order passed by the ministry of corporate affairs (MCA) for merging (erstwhile) Financial Technologies (India) Ltd (FTIL), which is now 63 Moons Technologies, with National Spot Exchange Ltd (NSEL).

"We have allowed the appeal," said a bench of Justice Rohinton Fali Nariman and Justice Vineet Saran in their judgement setting aside the High Court order.

Justice Nariman said that the bench has set down certain norms that includes the objective criteria and public interest for taking recourse to such a merger.

In its order, the apex court mentioned three grounds as stated by the Union government for the merger between FTIL and NSEL. These includes, restoring and safeguarding public confidence, giving effect to business reality of the case by consolidating the business of FTIL and NSEL, and preventing FTIL from distancing itself from NSEL and for facilitating NSEL in recovering dues from defaulters by pooling human and financial resources of FTIL and NSEL.



The government has contineously claimed that that these three grounds contribute a facet of 'public interest' in the context of provisions of Section 396 of the Companies Act.



The Supreme Court, however, observed that the first and second ground, as mentioned by the High Court, were not even contained in the draft order of amalgamation. Even otherwise, it was held that these grounds were in breach of Section 396(3) and (4) of the Companies Act.



It was further held that so far as the third reason is concerned, the SC said that the reason by itself was for the purpose of private interest of a group of investors and traders, as distinct from public interest.



"In the context of compulsory amalgamation of two or more companies, the expression 'public interest' would mean the welfare of the public or the interest of society as a whole, as contrasted with the "selfish" interest of a group of private individuals…. For all these reasons, we find that no reasonable body of persons properly instructed in law could possibly arrive at the conclusion that the impugned order has been made in public interest," the bench said in the order.

Earlier in December 2017, the Bombay High Court had upheld order passed by MCA for merger of FTIL (now 63 Moons Technologies), with NSEL.

After the HC order, in a regulatory filing 63 Moons Technologies had said that it would challenge the decision in the Supreme Court.

In February 2016, the MCA had ordered merge of FTIL with NSEL under Section 396 of the Companies Act. However, this was challenged by 63 Moons Technologies in the Bombay HC.

A few months later, in July 2016, the economic offences wing (EOW) of Mumbai police had attached assets worth Rs7,063 crore belonging to FTIL, owned and funded by Jignesh Shah. In a statement issued that time, the ministry of finance, had said, “So far, 831 properties worth Rs7,063 crore have been attached by EOW, Mumbai police under MPID Act, out of which, attachment of 711 properties worth Rs6,115 crore have been notified.”

While welcoming the judgement of the Supreme Court, S Rajendran, managing director of 63 Moons Technologies, said the company has been articulating in the past that the merger will serve no purpose for the stakeholders of either NSEL or FTIL but to benefit only a few people with vested interest. As such, our stand has been fully vindicated, he added.
