Katrina Kaif on break-up with Ranbir Kapoor: ‘I had to take full responsibility for my part’

shriaya.dutt@tribuneindia.com

Tribune Web Desk

Chandigarh, April 30

Katrina Kaif has opened up about her breakup with Ranbir Kapoor. The ‘Bharat’ actress, who had once called her break-up with the actor a “blessing”, said in a recent interview that she took full responsibility for her part in the relationship.

Katrina Kaif, who is known for being a complete professional, was first rumoured to be dating Ranbir while filming ‘Ajab Prem Ki Ghazab Kahani’ in 2009.

Katrina said in the interview: “I had to break before I could proceed to rebuild myself. I had to unravel and feel everything that had happened I had to take full responsibility for my part in the equation, what I could and should have done better. And accept that the parts that I was not responsible for were not my problem”.

"One thought that helped me when I was at my lowest was something my mom told me, 'So many girls and women go through the same thing; you feel you are alone, but you are not.' That thought was very comforting," she added.

Katrina further said that she has always been very emotional and that she wasn't going to change that for anyone.

She continued: "I've always been emotional. I’m a Cancerian and a sensitive soul. I'm not going to lose that or change that for anyone. But what I have learnt is that as a woman, you must protect and maintain your identity. Your sense of self-worth comes from within and not from another person. You come into this world alone, and you leave alone. That’s something you should not lose sight of."

"I'm not saying be guarded in love. No, love with all your heart. Being in a relationship is beautiful and I have a lot to give to a person. But I know now that nobody else gives you your identity," she said.

Last year, while talking about the positives of her life post her breakup with Ranbir, Katrina had said in an interview to 'Vogue' magazine: “It’s probably one of the first times in my life where I really had only myself to focus on. And when you focus on yourself, often, the first thing you realise is that you don’t really know yourself. It’s like a period of not knowing, a period of being uncomfortable because you’re seeing yourself in your raw form without embellishments and then accepting that you don’t really know who you are”.

“I now see it as a blessing because I was able to recognise my patterns, thought processes and things that I had been so sure of my whole life. I could see them from a whole different perspective," she had then concluded.
