Sri Lanka WARNING: Attackers plotting MORE strikes before Ramadan, officials warn

Sri Lanka government to ban all face coverings says report

top stories direct to your inbox SUBSCRIBE Invalid email Sign up to receive our rundown of the day'sdirect to your inbox We use your sign-up to provide content in ways you've consented to and to improve our understanding of you. This may include adverts from us and 3rd parties based on our understanding. You can unsubscribe at any time. More info

Sri Lanka’s head of police ministerial security division warned of a second round of attacks to come yesterday or last Sunday. Even though there were no attacks, officials continue to remain alert in the wake of a nationwide threat. US ambassador Ambassador Alaina Teplitz reiterated the speculations and believes the militant group may be at large to plan more attacks. He said on Tuesday: "We do believe that the terrorist threat is ongoing and there may be active plotters. Active members of the attack group that carried out the terror attacks on Easter Sunday may still be at large.

"We certainly have reason to believe that the active attack group has not been fully rendered inactive. We do believe that there is active planning underway." On April 21, ISIS militants carried out attacks on hotels and churches during the Easter Sunday service killing more than 250 people across Sri Lanka, including 42 foreign nationals. A senior police intelligence official said on Tuesday: “Security will stay tight for several days because military and police are still tracking down suspects.” ISIS militants are expected to strike before Ramadan, another Government source said, forcing all police and security forces across the Indian Ocean to increase their arms and remain vigilant.

Sri Lanka is increasing security forces over fears islamists will strike before Ramadan

The holy month of Ramadan begins on May 6. Colombo’s Government had removed a ban on social media which was imposed to prevent rumours from circulating, Sri Lankan President Maithripala Sirisena’s source confirmed. On Monday, a Government ban on women wearing face veils came into force. It comes as President Sirisena said he was using emergency powers to bring in the ban “to ensure national security” following the Easter attacks that killed more than 250 civilians.

Sri Lankan officials believe the jihadists may strike before Ramadan

A statement from the president said: “The ban is to ensure national security... No one should obscure their faces to make identification difficult.” Authorities suspect two members from ISIS groups - National Thawheedh Jamaath (NTJ) and Jammiyathul Millathu Ibrahim - of carrying out the attacks. On Monday, over 10,000 Sri Lankan soldiers raided the headquarters of hardline Islamist group NTJ and detained one man at the premises. Police believe the group’s founder, Zahran Hashim, was the leader behind the Easter Sunday attacks.

Sri Lankan soldiers stand guard outside St. Anthony's Shrine in Colombo

Sri Lanka: Soldiers allegedly in gun battle with suspects
