Will revoke Article 370 if BJP comes to power again: Shah

BJP president Amit Shah Tuesday said Article 370 will be withdrawn from Jammu and Kashmir, if the saffron party is voted back to power.

Addressing an election rally here in Madhya Pradesh, Shah also slammed National Conference (NC) leader Omar Abdullah for his statement seeking a separate prime minister for Jammu and Kashmir.

"We will remove Article 370 if voted back to power," Shah said. Article 370 gives special status to Jammu and Kashmir.

Shah also alleged that the Opposition, including the Congress and the NC, wanted a separate prime minister for J&K.

"The Congress, the NC, SP and BSP all wanted to separate Kashmir from Hindustan. But this Narendra Modi government will never allow secession (of J&K) from India.

"No BJP worker will let such a thing to happen. We will remove Article 370 if you make Narendra Modi the PM again," Shah told the gathering.

The BJP chief also hit out at the Congress over its poll promise to scrap sedition law if voted to power.

"The Congress is siding with those who shouted anti-national slogans. You talk about scrapping the sedition law. Tell me, if someone is caught spying for Pakistan, should action be taken under sedition law or not?



"Anti-national slogans like 'Bharat Tere Tukde Honge' were shouted in JNU, shouldn't these people be sent to jails? Rahul Baba, the people of the country understand everything," Shah said.

He also slammed the Congress over party leader Sam Pitroda's statement in which he suggested holding talks with Pakistan, days after 40 jawans of CRPF were killed in Pulwama terror attack.

"Rahul Baba's guru Sam Pitroda gave a statement..tell me should we talk with those who killed our 40 jawans or attack them? Congress says we should talk to them. Rahul Baba you be happy with your policy. This is Narendra Modi government which will reply to gun fire with a bombshell," he said.

Shah said terrorists from Pakistan used to cross border and kill Indian soldiers at will when Manmohan Singh was the prime minister.

"However, the security of the country has been strengthened since Modi became the PM," he said.

Shah also attacked the Congress for questioning the efficacy of the Balakot air strike in February this year.

"When the entire country broke into celebration after the air strike, a pall of gloom descended on the office of Rahul Baba," the BJP chief said.

He also took a dig at Gandhi over his "long leaves".

"I have seen Modiji not taking a single leave since the last 20 years. He works 18 out of 24 hours. On the other hand, Rahul Gandhi goes on a long leave when temperature soars. Even his party men and his mother (UPA chairperson Sonia Gandhi) keep looking for him," Shah said.

He also referred to the Income Tax raids against close aides of Madhya Pradesh Chief Minister Kamal Nath.

"Within three months of coming to power in Madhya Pradesh, transactions of Rs 281 crore were found during the raids. If this is the beginning, what will happen in the next 60 months?" he said.

Shah also slammed Gandhi for the "Chowkidar Chor Hai" (watchman is a thief) jibe he uses to target Modi. "The Congress president had to apologise to the Supreme Court for his remark," Shah said.

Targeting the Congress, Shah said, "There were corruption charges of Rs 12 lakh crore during the UPA government but not a single allegation of corruption was levelled against the NDA regime since it came to power in 2014".

While six of the 29 Lok Sabha seats in Madhya Pradesh went to polls in the first phase on April 29, the other 23 constituencies will vote on May 6, 12 and 19.

(This story has not been edited by Business Standard staff and is auto-generated from a syndicated feed.)
