News, Sports, Jobs - News-Sentinel

Northern Ireland marks 50 years since Bloody Sunday January 31, 2022 LONDON (AP) — Hundreds of people gathered Sunday in Northern Ireland to mark 50 years since "Bloody Sunday," one of the deadliest days in the conflict known as The Troubles. Thirteen people were killed and 15 others wounded when British soldiers fired on civil rights protesters on Jan. 30, ...

Ottawa police investigating some anti vaccine protesters January 31, 2022 OTTAWA, Ontario (AP) — Police in Canada's capital said Sunday they are investigating possible criminal charges after anti-vaccine protesters urinated on the National War Memorial, danced on the Tomb of the Unknown Soldier and used the statue of Canadian hero Terry Fox to display an ...

From Kabul, pregnant reporter fights NZ govt to come home January 31, 2022 ISLAMABAD (AP) — She reported on the difficult conditions mothers and babies face just to survive in desperate Afghanistan. Now, a pregnant New Zealand reporter has chosen Kabul as a temporary base for her uphill fight to return home because of her country's strict COVID-19 entry ...

Censure motion over storm fails against Greek government January 31, 2022 ATHENS, Greece (AP) — A censure motion brought by the main opposition party against the Greek government over its handling of a severe snowstorm last Monday has been rejected after a three-day debate. Lawmakers voted 156-142 against the motion after an often-acrimonious debate in which ...

Rain-fed landslides, flooding kill at least 19 in Brazil January 31, 2022 BRASILIA, Brazil (AP) — Landslides and flooding caused by heavy rains killed at least 19 people in Brazil's most populous state Sunday while high waters forced some 500,000 families from their homes over the weekend, authorities said. Three people from the same family died when a landslide ...

Ardern tests negative as omicron takes hold in New Zealand January 31, 2022 WELLINGTON, New Zealand (AP) — New Zealand Prime Minister Jacinda Ardern said Monday she has tested negative for the coronavirus after coming into close contact with an infected person on a commercial flight. Ardern had been isolating since late Saturday after the Jan. 22 exposure first came ...

N. Korea confirms test of missile capable of striking Guam January 31, 2022 SEOUL, South Korea (AP) — North Korea confirmed Monday it test-launched an intermediate-range ballistic missile capable of reaching the U.S. territory of Guam, the North's most significant weapon launch in years, as Washington plans to respond to demonstrate it's committed to its allies' ...

UN says over 100 ex-Afghan and international forces killed January 31, 2022 UNITED NATIONS (AP) — The United Nations has received "credible allegations" that more than 100 former members of the Afghan government, its security forces and those who worked with international troops have been killed since the Taliban took over the country Aug. 15, Secretary-General ...

UAE intercepts Yemen missile as Israeli president visits January 31, 2022 DUBAI, United Arab Emirates (AP) — The United Arab Emirates intercepted a ballistic missile fired by Yemen's Houthi rebels early Monday as the Israeli president visited the country, authorities said, the third such attack in recent weeks. The attack amid President Isaac Herzog's visit only ...

China manufacturing activity grows at slower pace in January January 31, 2022 BEIJING (AP) — Manufacturing activity in the world's second largest economy grew at a slower pace in January compared to the previous month, according to an official government measure, as the country's strict "zero-tolerance" COVID-19 measures put a dampener on economic activity. The ...

EXPLAINER: Why US sanctions may target individual Russians January 31, 2022 WASHINGTON (AP) — The White House and U.S. officials have threatened Russia with financial sanctions carrying "severe consequences" if it invades Ukraine, but so far plenty of people have been prime targets for Western pain. Experts say it's unlikely the U.S. and its allies would agree to ...

Weather, cleanup keep oil slick away from Thai resort island January 31, 2022 RAYONG, Thailand (AP) — Favorable wind and sea conditions kept an oil slick away from beaches in eastern Thailand on Sunday, according to authorities, but concerns remained that the spillage may yet strike a popular resort island. Emergency workers in protective gear removed contaminated ...

Boris Johnson’s mounting trouble is treasure for satirists January 31, 2022 LONDON (AP) — A politician's troubles are a humorist's treasures. The scandal-prone British Prime Minister Boris Johnson has given cartoonists and meme-makers unimaginable riches for years, and with his hold on power now in jeopardy, their fortunes are only growing. Johnson and his staff ...

French left is divided, weakened in presidential race January 31, 2022 PARIS (AP) — The French left is running divided and weakened in this year's presidential race as at least five mainstream presidential candidates have rejected any alliances with each other — and an online vote meant to pick a leader appears doomed to fail. An icon of the French left, ...

Storm Malik hits northern Europe with force; at least 4 dead January 31, 2022 HELSINKI (AP) — A powerful winter storm swept through northern Europe over the weekend, killing at least four people, destroying houses and cars, closing bridges and causing flooding and halting transport while leaving thousands of households without electricity. Storm Malik was advancing in ...

Socialists win reelection in Portugal, eye major investments January 31, 2022 LISBON, Portugal (AP) — Portugal's center-left Socialist Party won a third straight general election Sunday, returning it to power as the country prepares to deploy billions of euros (dollars) of European Union aid for the economy after the COVID-19 pandemic. In a ballot that took place amid ...

Lebanon’s FM goes to Kuwait with answers to Gulf suggestions January 30, 2022 BEIRUT (AP) — Lebanon's foreign minister headed to Kuwait Saturday to deliver answers to a list of policy suggestions made to the country by Persian Gulf nations in an attempt to end an impasse between both sides. Ahead of his departure, Foreign Minister Abdallah Bouhabib made it clear that ...

Thousands displaced in Congo’s east amid rebel, army clashes January 30, 2022 KIBUMBA, Congo (AP) — Thousands of people in Congo have been displaced after they fled ongoing clashes between the Congolese army and rebel fighters this week. On Tuesday, a fresh attack carried out by the March 23 Movement, or M23, targeted a Congolese army position in the territory of ...

Austria to ease virus rules after vaccine mandate begins January 30, 2022 VIENNA (AP) — Austria plans to loosen coronavirus restrictions in February after the country's national vaccine mandate, the first of its kind in Europe, takes effect on Tuesday. Starting Feb. 5, restaurants will be allowed to remain open until midnight, as opposed to 10 p.m., Chancellor ...

Cameroon blames stadium deaths on ‘massive’ influx of fans January 30, 2022 YAOUNDE, Cameroon (AP) — Cameroon authorities have blamed a deadly stadium crush at the African Cup of Nations soccer tournament on a "massive" influx of ticketless fans who arrived late to a game involving the host team and tried to force their way in to avoid security checks and COVID-19 ...
