People are no goods, government finally realises after high court rap

BENGALURU: The state government seems to be springing into action after the stinging Karnataka High Court observation on people being transported in goods vehicles.The chief secretary, convened a meeting of senior bureaucrats on Tuesday to chalk out a strategy to end the practice. Deputy commissioners of all the districts who happen to chair the Road Safety Authority in their respective districts were present in the meeting. Each one was asked to come out with a district specific action plan to curb the menace, following which a state-specific plan will be drafted.Ferrying people, especially women, children and labourers, in goods and construction vehicles is a practice that has come to be normalised. Though it is predominantly seen in the districts of North Karnataka, where public transportation is inadequate, such cases are prevalent even in Bengaluru. There have been instances of people traveling to the city from nearby towns and villages for work in goods vehicles. Pourakarmikas are often transported in auto-tippers.The high court took up the case based on a petition filed by a member of the Karnataka State Legal Services Authority. It held that such a practice, besides being inhuman, posed a danger to the lives of the women, children and the working class being transported in goods vehicles.The court, which also made the Bruhat Bengaluru Mahanagara Palike (BBMP) a party to the case, directed the transport department to come out with an action plan by June 3.A senior transport department officer said that departments such as transport, police, labour, education and the KSRTC are working on a strategy to stop goods vehicles from carrying people. In fact, the transport department has been issuing media advertisements warning people against such travelling.Erring vehicles would be seized, the department has said. “We will conduct regular checks. But the larger issue to be addressed is how we can provide efficient and cheap transportation to the weaker sections so that their dependency on goods vehicles is reduced,” one transport department official who did not wish to be named, said. The government is working on a continuous action plan and not a one step solution, he revealed.Officials say this illegal means of ferrying people is on the rise and has turned out to be a business.BBMP commissioner N Manjunath Prasad said that he has directed officials to ensure that no BBMP worker is ferried in goods vehicles or auto-tippers. “Our role is limited to the extent that we do not let our workers travel on such vehicles. Rest of the responsibility lies with the transport and the police department,” he said.
