When the entire family turned into a terror cell: Similarity between Sri Lanka bombings and 2003 Mumbai blast

Sri Lankans light candles and pray outside St Anthony's Church in Colombo, Sri Lanka | Photo Credit: AP

It was not a usual Sunday (April 21, 2019). Churches across Sri Lanka were packed with Easter Sunday worshippers. Just when the churchgoers were celebrating the resurrection of Jesus Christ that is said to have happened nearly 2000 years ago, blasts shook three churches across the island nation. Around the same time, more blasts took place at three upscale hotels in Colombo, not only breaking the nearly decade-long peace in Sri Lanka but also leaving the entire country traumatised and hunting for answers.

More than 250 people lost their lives in the mindless killings and over 500 have been left injured. The bombings were near-simultaneous, highly coordinated, and found to have been carried out by a group of Sri Lankan Muslims, some of them quite rich and some of them also highly educated.

What added to the horror was that wife of one of the two brothers, who were suicide bombers at Shangri-La Hotel in Colombo, blew herself up at the time of a raid by the Sri Lankan Police at their residence later that day. Her two daughters were also killed in the blast, reminding us of a similar incident when an entire family was involved in an act of terror right here in India.

Mumbai residents Hanif Syed, his wife Fehmida Syed, and the couple’s two daughters hired a taxi from Andheri to Gateway of India on August 25, 2003. Albeit Hanif and Fehmida were not suicide bombers, the bomb which they deliberately left behind in the taxi that they travelled a distance in, claimed 10 lives. The family was arrested later and the youngest daughter - Shakira (4) – was spared the trial and punishment.

It was later revealed that Fehmida was one of the two persons who had kept a bomb on the BEST bus travelling on route no 340 from Andheri to Ghatkopar on July 28, 2003. Four people were killed and more than 30 wounded. Research shows that Fehmida told the police that upon returning home after placing her first bomb, she had nonchalantly continued with household chores like other housewives, and even went to the local vegetable market to purchase groceries and cooked food on returning home.

Fehmida, as was argued by Special Public Prosecutor Ujjwal Nikam, was not just a passive conspirator but provided thorough assistance in zeroing down upon the targets. She was her husband’s confidante and associate in the heinous act of terror. Hanif Syed and Fehmida Syed had been married for more than 20 years.

As per India Today, the couple’s elder daughter Farheen, who was 16 at the time of the ghastly act, had shocked the police with her cold-blooded statement: "Maut se kaun darta hai? Hume marne ka dar nahi lagta. (Who’s scared of death! The thought of death does not scare us!)"

Interestingly, the couple was popular in the Salim Chawl, Chimatpada locality of Andheri East where they resided, for their helpfulness, much like the Sri Lankan brothers - Imsath Ahmed Ibrahim and Ilham Ahmed Ibrahim - and the terrorist lady who is said to have died in the blasts in Sri Lanka.

The Sri Lankan bomber brother duo had lived a life of privileges as their father Mohamed Yusuf Ibrahim is the country’s spice tycoon. He has also been arrested in the case now on suspicion of having aided and abetted his sons in carrying out the deplorable attacks.

The Mumbai couple said they were avenging the Gujarat riots, not an acceptable or plausible defence, but yet a trigger according to them. But what were the Sri Lankan terrorists taking revenge for, if indeed they were, is yet to be comprehended. The Sri Lankan bombings on Easter Sunday could easily qualify as one of the deadliest terrorist operations in the world. The Islamic State later claiming responsibility for the attack, stating that the same was for avenging Syria (as alleged by ISIS chief Abu Bakr Al-Baghdadi in a video), only compounded the puzzle.

Why would the Islamic State target Sri Lanka to avenge its fall in its citadel Baghouz, Syria? The Easter Day serial blasts - carried out by a few Sri Lankan citizens vowing allegiance to an Islamist radical group called National Thowheed Jamaath - do seem to have been executed in a synchronised, well-coordinated and sophisticated manner within a short span of time and inflicted such a high number of casualties, a hallmark of thorough training by a terror group.

As Sri Lanka grapples to find the reasons behind the blasts, what’s even scarier is that almost every day, more and more safe houses are being uncovered across the island nation, indicating how deeply the religious extremism has seeped into the society.

Why did the Sri Lankan authorities do nothing to prevent the attacks despite having considerable warnings from India? The Indian intelligence had been issuing warnings for weeks, including one such alert issued on the morning of the attack.

As Sri Lanka tries to figure out why the attacks happened, one wonders why would one inspire one’s own family members to become a terrorist!

The views expressed by the author are personal and do not in any way represent those of Times Network.
