Low Polling adds to BJP troubles in poll for LS in 2019

Low Polling adds to BJP troubles in poll for LS in 2019

The next four phases of the ongoing general elections are crucially critical for the ruling BJP because it either acquires a much higher strike rate in remaining 240 seats to compensate for its losses in the first three phases or it would be doomed to the opposition benches.

Now it is very clear that ongoing election is between Prime Minister Narendra Modi and the rest of the opposition. The BJP is back to power if Modi's popularity is the same as that 2014. If it is coming down, then the party will begin to lose. Extent by which Modi has come down in public estimation, will also decide the depth to which the BJP will fall.

Challenge for the BJP is coming from the Southern states and the Hindi heartland. While in the south, the ruling party has not been able to make much headway despite its best effort, there are serious setback in the 10 Hindi speaking states. Though the BJP leaders are hoping against the hope of making up its losses from West Bengal and Odisha, claims seem to be boastful. There are likely to be marginal gains in these two states but the same would not make up for the losses elsewhere in the country.

In four southern states and one Union Territory, the BJP had won 21 out of total 130 seats in the last general elections. It had 17 from Karnataka, two from Andhra Pradesh and one each from Telangana and Tamil Nadu. Voting is over in the southern states. However, it seems impossible that the saffron party would be able to repeat its performance of 2014 rather its tally is likely to be lower than last time. In other states too where voting is over, reports of gains for the BJP are not coming.

The BJP, that had bagged 161 seats in the remaining four phases in 2014, would not only have to retain the number but would have to increase substantially in order to remain the leading party to stake a claim to form the government.

A close look at the coming phases reveals a very tough fight for the BJP as it is pitted against powerful regional forces. In the fourth phase on April 29, electorate will pick up their representatives in 71 Lok Sabha seats in 9 states. More than half of these states are from Hindi heartland where the BJP had swept the election in 2014 winning 40 seats from Bihar, Jharkhand, Madhya Pradesh, Rajasthan and UP.

While in Bihar the BJP is entered into the fray with its back towards the wall as it had to concede 5 seats to its new ally JD (U) and is facing double anti-incumbency, in Jharkhand where it had won 12 out of the total 14 seats it is facing a combined opposition of the Congress, JMM, JVM and the RJD making its task of retaining seats impossible particularly in the absence of a Modi wave that had destroyed all barriers.

In Madhya Pradesh and Rajasthan where the BJP had won 18 seats of 19 going to poll in this phase, the Congress has emerged a formidable rival after the formation of the government in the wake of its victory in assembly elections in November-December 2018. In UP too the BJP had 12 From remaining 31 the BJP had only 5 seats as rest went to powerful regional parties like the TMC, BJD and others. In Maharashtra where 17 seats including six seats from Mumbai are one stake, the BJP and its ally Shiv Sena are facing an uphill task in the face of opposition from Congress-NCP and the double anti-incumbency against the BJP governments in the state as well as at the Centre making a repeat of the 2104 performance not only difficult but impossible. In the rest 14 seats in Odisha and West Bengal where the BJP top leaders are claiming big gains, the saffron party is more likely to gain in vote share than increasing its tally substantially to make for its losses in either Hindi heartland or in South.

In the next phase scheduled for May 6, 51 seats in 7 states will be at stake and the BJP had 39 of them in its kitty last time. Electorate of Bihar, Jharkhand, Madhya Pradesh, Rajasthan and UP is going to exercise their franchise to choose their representatives in 42 Lok Sabha seats. Having won majority of seats last time, further improvement for the BJP is impossible despite the best possible efforts of the formidable election machine of the ruling party that is out to win at any cost.

In the last two phases scheduled for May 12 and 19 during which 118 seats in 9 state and Union Territory of Chandigarh are going to be at stake. The BJP had won 77 seats while the Congress had only 5 to its credit. In the rest 36 seats, 17 had been taken by the Trinamool Congress while rest 19 were win by smaller parties.

In these phase 23 seats from Haryana and Punjab are going to polls. The BJP had won 9 and the Congress had 4. It seems difficult for the BJP to repeat its performance when Modi's charisma was untested and untired. Now situation has changed. The Prime Minister's popularity has taken a knock down though Modi is a deciding issue in this election.

A comprehensive and realistic assessment does not reveal an upper hand for the BJP. The opposition parties that include the Congress and regional parties like the SP, BSP. RJD. JD (U), JD (S), TMC, BJD are going to emerge important players. A BJP-led government cannot be ruled out though it would be a coalition government with many more post-poll partners in the NDA than they are at present. Whether Modi would be the next Prime Minister or not does not seem to be certain now. His return to the country's top executive post would depend upon the number of seats that the BJP gets.

In the changing political scenario, a non-BJP government after May 23 cannot also be ruled out. A small development often changes the public perception impacting the final outcome.

Dr. Satish Misra is a Veteran Journalist & Research Associate with Observer Research Foundation.

—[IFS]
