Chaliye, chaliye: Akshay Kumar answers why he did not vote in Lok Sabha polls 2019

Akshay Kumar is being slammed online for his reaction to being asked why he did not vote in the 17th Lok Sabha polls

Akshay Kumar might be Prime Minister Narendra Modi's choice for a 'non-political' interview during the 17th Lok Sabha elections, but that hasn't insulated him from troll attack on social media. Kumar, who reportedly holds a Canadian passport, is not eligible to vote in India. For many people online, that is a sacrilege of sorts for Bollywood's new-age Bharat Kumar, who loves treating his fans to patriotic films at least once a year. From Baby to Gold, Akshay has fought for the country many times on the big screen. He has set up Bharat Ke Veer, an online portal to help Army widows. But none of this is enough to keep him from the regular criticism that comes his way on social media.

A clip from the screening of Blank is going viral today. Akshay, who attended the show on Tuesday night with wife Twinkle Khanna, was asked, "People love you but sometimes people criticise you for small things like the fact that you did not vote yesterday..."

Akshay did not let the reporter finish his question. He grabbed the reporter and dismissed the question saying, "Chaliye, chaliye." The Kesari actor then spoke to someone behind him, "This is what I tell you..." At this point in the video, there is no audio.

The Twitter user who shared the video on the micro-blogging site, wrote, "Apolitical Akshay Kumar's angry reaction when a reporter asked him reason for not casting his vote."

Apolitical Akshay Kumar's angry reaction when a reporter asked him reason for not casting his vote. pic.twitter.com/tlycPwWmDh Mohammed Zubair (@zoo_bear) May 1, 2019

The user went on to write, "I could see @ANI mike too. Looks like they forgot to upload this video."

I could see @ANI mike too. Looks like they forgot to upload this video. pic.twitter.com/Bt1rLfFaWy Mohammed Zubair (@zoo_bear) May 1, 2019

The video evoked strong reactions from Twitterati.

"In movies only his patriotism comes out but in reality he is money minded business guy he will do anything for money," wrote a Twitter user.

"Time to take 'ChandiniChowk In Canada'," wrote someone else, referring to Akshay's film Chandni Chowk To China.

Someone also 'wondered' if the 'audio was deliberately fazed out', "I wonder if audio is deliberately fazed out, when akshay says "this is why I tell you..""

On April 29, Mumbai went to vote in the fourth phase of the Lok Sabha polls. While most Bollywood stars went to their respective poll booths and cast their vote, and showed off their inked finger on social media in selfies, Akshay Kumar was absent from it all. Twinkle Khanna shared her own poll selfie on Instagram on Monday, saying 'Vote India Vote'. Many people on Twitter questioned Akshay's absence on Monday too.

As response to Akshay Kumar's 'chaliye, chaliye' video, a Twitter user shared a video from the past where the actor can be heard saying, "Toronto is my home."

"I must tell you... this is my home. Toronto is my home. After I retire from this industry, I'm going to come back here," Akshay says in the video.

" Tronto is My Home " says Khiladi International pic.twitter.com/kGvWuvv9SD The Librandus Of India (@TheLibrandus) May 1, 2019

Akshay Kumar's 'nationality' has been subject of much discussion the past weeks, especially after PM Narendra Modi's interview to the actor.

ALSO READ | Twinkle Khanna replies to Modi's 'saara gussa' remark: Not only does PM know I exist, he actually reads my work

ALSO READ | Twinkle Khanna on reply to PM Modi: Only party I endorse has vodka shots and hangover
