BJP will lose 100 seats in UP, Bihar, Jharkhand: Tejashwi Yadav

LUCKNOW: Rashtriya Janata Dal (RJD) leader Tejashwi Yadav on Monday claimed that BJP will lose over 100 seats in Uttar Pradesh, Bihar and Jharkhand, where the opposition alliances will fight with the collective goal of defeating the saffron party. BJP won 105 seats from these states in the 2014 Lok Sabha elections After having called on BSP chief Mayawati on Sunday night and "seeking her blessings", Tejashwi met Samajwadi Party chief Akhilesh Yadav on Monday to congratulate him for the gathbandhan in UP.When asked whether he would align with Congress in Bihar, Tejashwi said BSP and SP had shown in UP bypolls that they were sufficient to defeat BJP. "The aim is to defeat BJP. Recently, Rahul Gandhi also said that whether they are there or not, BJP won't win. This is sufficient," he said. Congress is RJD's ally in Bihar."They (BSP-SP) will win here and we will win there (Bihar)," he added, without clarifying his statement.Calling the alliance between BSP and SP historic, the RJD leader said that his party workers in UP would support it at every step. Calling the alliance a need of the hour, he said: "Nobody in Patna had envisioned that Lalu Yadav and Nitish Kumar would come together. BJP tried everything to ensure that the alliance does not happen. We are already dealing with the repercussions of that. They filed a case against me when I was 13-14 years old. CBI and ED are not central agencies any more, they are BJP's alliance partners." The former Bihar deputy CM targeted chief minister Nitish Kumar saying, "Chacha Nitish went to BJP after demeaning public sentiment and he will not be forgiven for this."Akhilesh thanked Tejashwi for coming down from Patna to congratulate them and said that it would cement the alliance further and encourage people to support them. "People across the country want BJP out and are very happy with our alliance. From Delhi to Kolkata, people are standing up against BJP," he said.
