Proud day for India, says Modi on UNSC decision

Jaipur: Prime Minister Narendra Modi said on Wednesday that it was a proud day for India after the United Nations (UN) declared Jaish-e-Mohammad (JeM) chief Masood Azhar a global terrorist.

In a huge diplomatic victory for India, the UN Security Council (UNSC) on Wednesday declared Pakistan-based JeM chief Masood Azhar a global terrorist, a move that was being blocked by China for nearly 10 years.



"This is the result of the joint efforts of 130 crore Indians," Modi said while addressing an election rally here.



"The international community stood beside India in its fight against terror. Hence I thank the international community on behalf of 130 crore Indians," Modi said.



The decision of the UNSC's 1267 Sanctions Committee came about two-and-a-half months after the JeM carried out the ghastly terror attack in Kashmir's Pulwama which killed 40 CRPF personnel.



Addressing the gathering, the Prime Minister said, "It seems I share a strong bond with Rajasthan, the land of warriors. Today I have come here with a good news. Right now I received a report from New York that the UN has declared Jem chief Masood Azhar a global terrorist."



The Prime Minister added that the diplomatic victory for India was being watched by the entire world. "When we were trying to get Masood Azhar branded as a global terrorist, the "Namdaars" were making a mockery of our efforts. Today I want to tell them that this is not Modi's success, but it is the success of 130 crore indians," Modi said.



Modi also said that India was trying to completely uproot terrorism from the country. "There was a time when India had a remote control government. In those days, even the Prime Minister's voice was not heard by the government. But today the country is witnessing how the voice of 130 crore people is roaring across the world.



"The entire world now listens to what India says. This has been proven today, and I want to say that this is just the beginning. Wait and see what comes next," Modi said, adding that India's policy was clear now, which was, "if they shoot, we shoot."



"This country trusts its 'chowkidar'. Today I have come to the land of brave soldiers and I would like to tell everyone that this is new India. We will eneter the terrorists' homes and eliminate them if the country faces threat from them. This is called a "damdaaar sarkar" (strong government)," Modi said. IANS
