Mayawati threatens to pull out of Congress govt in MP

LUCKNOW: BSP supremo Mayawati threatened to withdraw support to the Kamal Nath-led Congress government in Madhya Pradesh, a day after her party candidate from Guna Lok Sabha seat joined the grand old party, triggering more bitterness in already strained ties.Mayawati, who helped prop up the Madhya Pradesh government with her two MLAs, may leave the Nath government struggling with a razor thin majority if she pulls the rug. Besides BSP, the MP government enjoys support of an SP legislator and four independents.BSP’s Lok Sabha candidate from Guna, Lokendra Singh Rajput, who was in the fray against Congress general secretary Jyotiraditya Scindia switched ranks on Monday night in the presence of Scindia and withdrew his nomination. Scindia welcomed Rajput in his fold and tweeted: “Young candidate Lokendra Singh joins Congress and has given us his support.”Stung by the Congress move, with polls in Guna scheduled on May 12, Mayawati tweeted on Tuesday — Congress party is no less than BJP in misusing government machinery. It has intimidated BSP candidate from Guna and forcibly made him withdraw from contest. BSP will respond by fighting on its own symbol and will now reconsider support to the Congress government.Party sources said Mayawati is fuming and if she decides to withdraw support to the Kamal Nath government, Samajwadi Party — her alliance partner in UP and MP — would also follow suit.While some sources in BSP indicate Rajput had been wanting to move to Congress for a while, a senior BSP member said Congress had shown no respect to the party that helped it to come to power in MP.“Since coming to power, Congress has been playing dirty with BSP. Three former BSP MLAs, who lost the 2018 election, joined Congress soon after. They were already hand in glove with Congress during the election. The party is trying to wreck the MP unit of BSP, but it will not succeed,” he said.In a statement issued on Tuesday, BSP alleged Congress seems to be fighting BSP in MP rather than BJP, and claimed the MP government had been harassing its cadre by registering fake cases or offering them incentives to quit the party.Mayawati further accused Congress of trying to hit the prospects of BSP-SP-RLD alliance in Lok Sabha elections in UP, saying Congress has fielded such candidates who would cut into the alliance votes on many seats and benefit BJP. “We announced our candidates much before Congress, but they still fielded such contestants who will cut into the alliance votes,” said a BSP leader.After Mayawati and UPA chairperson Sonia Gandhi displayed rare bonhomie while sharing the stage at the swearing-in of Karnataka chief minister HD Kumaraswamy in May 2018, relations between the two parties have been on a downward spiral. The two failed to reach agreement on seat sharing for assembly polls in Chhattisgarh , MP and Rajasthan, after which talks of an alliance in UP also collapsed. Mayawati has been hitting out at Congress regularly, often equating it with BJP.In another tweet on Tuesday, Mayawati warned people against voting for Congress. She said Congress leaders in UP are saying SP-BSP alliance should not win even if BJP wins. This shows the casteist, narrow thinking of Congress and makes it clear that only our alliance can defeat BJP, she added.BSP MLA from Bhind, Sanjeev Singh, told TOI, “I know about Behenji’s tweet as much as you do and we will abide by what our party supremo’s directive.”(With inputs from Bhopal bureau)
