Lok Sabha elections 2019: Notice to Delhi CM for ‘take cash from BJP, Congress, vote for AAP’ remark

Chief minister Arvind Kejriwal, within hours after being served a notice by the Chief Electoral Officer of Delhi over allegations of violating the Model Code of Conduct, on Wednesday urged voters “to accept money from the BJP and the Congress but cast their votes in favour of the Aam Aadmi Party”.

Earlier in the day, the Delhi CEO served a notice to Kejriwal, also the convener of the AAP, seeking his response over allegations made by leader of opposition Vijender Gupta that pamphlets were being distributed by the party asking voters to take bribe from the Congress and the BJP but cast their votes in favour of AAP in the May 12 polls.

“We sent a notice to Arvind Kejriwal, convener of AAP, seeking his response on the matter. Kejriwal was asked to reply by Wednesday, 5 pm. But as the letter was dispatched late, we would wait for his reply till Thursday,” said a senior official from the Delhi CEO’s office.

Also read | Lok Sabha elections 2019: Akali Dal banks on BJP top guns for final poll push

Around 8 pm, however, while addressing slum clusters in Wazirpur as a part of his road show in Chandni Chowk parliamentary constituency, Kejriwal repeated the statement.

“Before the elections, other parties would come and distribute money. What would you do then? Take all the money but cast your vote in favour of the broom (AAP’s election symbol). No one will come to know in whose favour you have cast your vote,” Kejriwal said on Wednesday.

Repeated calls and messages to Saurabh Bhardawaj, the AAP’s national spokesperson, and Gopal Rai, AAP’s convener in Delhi, went unanswered.

The poll panel served the notice to Kejriwal after two senior leaders of the BJP, Vijender Gupta and Arti Mehra,

lodged a complaint with the CEO against AAP on Monday for allegedly distributing pamphlets in slum clusters.

HT has a copy of the letter sent to Kejriwal and the pamphlet that was being allegedly distributed by AAP. “Kejriwal is violating the MCC (model code of conduct) even after being served a notice by the poll panel. This is highly condemnable and objectionable. This is absolutely lawlessness,” said Gupta.

This is not the first time that such allegations have come up against AAP and its convener.

In 2015, Kejriwal had made similar remarks during the Delhi assembly election campaign. In January 2017, during the Goa assembly elections, Kejriwal urged voters to accept money from other parties and vote for AAP.

Following the incident, the Election Commission of India had issued a warning to the party.
