Exclusive: Now Amit Shah predicts Mamata's fall

On the heels of Prime Minister Narendra Modi's warning of a revolt within the Trinamool Congress, BJP chief Amit Shah has issued his own note of caution to West Bengal CM Mamata Banerjee -- save your government, if you can.

"We are not talking about toppling anyone, but what can we do if her government topples under its own weight?" he asked.

The BJP chief's remarks during India Today TV's Jab We Met show came in response to questions over PM Modi's controversial comments at a West Bengal rally on Monday that 40 of the TMC MLAs were in touch with him.

"Didi, on May 23, when the results will be declared, the lotus will bloom everywhere and your MLAs will leave you. Even today, Didi, 40 of your MLAs are in contact with me," the PM said, sparking opposition accusations of horse-trading.

Seen as the closest lieutenant of the Prime Minister, the BJP president indicated the West Bengal Chief Minister could be heading into a political crisis.

"It's her job to save her government. It's her job to keep her flock of MLAs together," Shah said, accusing Banerjee of plunging West Bengal into lawlessness.

"The MLAs can see the public outrage. It's not against them. It's against Mamataji and her nephew, her goondas," charged Shah.

Prodded if he also thought that the TMC government might fall, the BJP leader warned its survival would become "impossible" after the results from the May 23 vote count.

"I don't want to get into any analysis but the mandate that is about to come would make it impossible for Mamataji to keep the TMC intact after that," Shah claimed.

He rebutted opposition accusations of horse-trading, terming them an "insult" to the people of West Bengal.

"Is this horse-trading?" he asked, pointing to crowds at his Howrah rally. "She's insulting the people of West Bengal. Are these people indulging in horse-trading? Hundreds of thousands of them are attending the PM's rallies. Is that horse-trading?"

Undeterred by the TMC's complaint to the Election Commission over the Prime Minister's MLA warning, the BJP president accused the West Bengal CM of using undemocratic means to silence dissent.

"Our helicopters are not allowed to fly (in West Bengal). My helicopter was delayed by an hour. She has deployed all sorts of undemocratic means," Shah alleged.

He expressed the confidence that the BJP would be able to secure a majority of Lok Sabha seats in the TMC-ruled West Bengal, insisting the Mamata Banerjee government has caused disaffection among the state's voters.

"West Bengal has been consigned to intruders, goondas and syndicates," he alleged.

NATIONAL SECURITY VERSUS ECONOMIC ISSUES

The BJP chief sought to defend the Modi government against opposition charges that the Centre has failed to deliver on the economic front.

At the same time, he stood firm on his party's national-security plank, saying its tough policy has produced effective results.

"Never in the past 70 years had seven crore rural women received cash benefits. Perhaps only 1-1.5 crore women got it. We gave cash benefits to seven crore poor women in the past five years," he said, listing out the Modi government's programs in the social and economic sectors.

"There's no single village which is not electrified today. After 70 years of independence, around 19,800 villages had no power. We completed electrification in five years. We are now close to providing electricity connection to every house."

Shah also referred to the NDA government's sanitation, healthcare, infrastructure and financing schemes.

"After the Narendra Modi government took charge, we emphasised on self-employment. If anybody says that 1.25 crore people of the country would be given a permanent or a government job, it's impossible," he said. "We'd have to change the way we think. We'd have to innovate and evolve methods in accordance with the requirements of our country."

He cited the flagship Skill Development, Startup India and Mudra projects in support of his argument.

"If a young woman opens a beauty parlour in her village from a Mudra loan, isn't that employment? I believe it is. A young man starting an automobile/tractor-repairing shop at a tehsil centre with a Rs five lakh-loan, another young man opening a barber shop in his village. Would you call it employment or not. I believe it is employment," he said.

The BJP president credited the Modi administration with introducing an "independent" security policy, describing the Balakot airstrikes as a watershed moment in the country's history.

"The Modi government took a firm decision and made the people of this country feel for the first time that our foreign and security policies are separate," Shah said. "The country's national security policy had remained merged with the foreign policy since Jawaharlal Nehru's time. It's for the first time that both the nation and the world now experience an independent security policy."

The BJP president insisted that the Modi government had "wounded the source of terror" militarily. "It's also a diplomatic victory that the entire world has now accepted Pakistan as a terror haven," he said.

The BJP president emphasised that the Indian retaliation for the Feb 14 Pulwama terror attack when asked who should be held responsible for the possible lapses that might have led to the suicide assault on the CRPF convoy.

"We responded. We punished them and I believe this policy would work against terror successfully. Pakistan is now under tremendous pressure, so much so that it has to change its policy of sheltering terror," he said.
