Cyclone Fani likely to cause thunderstorm in Agra, city administration issues warning

A social activist appealed Agra authorities to issue a phone number which can be contacted at the time of the disaster. (Photo: ANI)

The Agra administration on Friday issued an advisory cautioning people on the possibility of cyclonic storm in western region of Uttar Pradesh.

These storms are the direct result of Cyclone Fani which is slowly approaching the southern parts of India and is expected to hit Odisha on Friday.

The India Meteorological Department yesterday had issued a warning against the thunderstorms and lightning accompanied with hail and gusty wind (40-50 km per hour) in Uttarakhand and Uttar Pradesh.

Speaking to India Today TV, Agra's Additional District Magistrate KP Singh said that according to Meteorological Department, many districts of Uttar Pradesh are likely to experience severe storms and rain. These storms may hit several districts in the Braj region including Agra.

The Met has raised an alert and cautioned the residents of the region to be careful towards their family and property, the additional district magistrate said.

Singh added that the district magistrate has formed a Committee of Administrative Officers which will help people affected by the storm and heavy rains. We have also conveyed to the inspector of the region that Taj Mahal and other historic buildings must be protected along with the entirety of their respective tourists, he said.

Social Activist Yogesh Malhotra said that the district administration has taken a good step by cautioning people through an advisory. Social organisations should also be prepared to help the public if in case any harm is caused due to the cyclonic storm. "We must not panic. We should be ready to face this natural calamity so that any kind of harm can be avoided," he said.

Following the alarms sounding against the severe cyclonic storm, Yogesh appealed to the district administration to set up a control room in Collectorate, Agra and asked the authorities to issue a phone number which can be contacted at the time of the disaster.

Cyclone Fani is likely to hit Odisha, West Bengal and Andhra Pradesh.

Both central and state governments have pressed several agencies into action including National Disaster Response Force (NDRF), Coast Guard, Indian Navy, State Disaster Response Fund (SDRF), Disaster Management Force, Odisha Fire Services and even local agencies.

Cyclone Fani LIVE Updates
