World Press Freedom Day

May 3 is observed as World Press Freedom Day. For India it is appropriate that the theme for this year’s WPFD, celebrated in Addis Ababa, Ethiopia from May 1-3 should be, “Media for Democracy, Journalism and Elections in Times of Disinformation.” Press freedom is shrinking by the day in every part of the world. The safety of journalists covering day to day affairs especially in conflict zones is a huge challenge. While media persons have no dearth of enemies especially from amongst the power holders, in India they are now also being booked under oppressive laws such as sedition or the National Security Act (NSA). It leaves us wondering how a journalist could be so dangerous merely for reporting the truth as he/she observes it.

In press freedom ranking India is today at 140th position from among 180 countries. This statistic is compiled by Reporters Sans Frontiers (RSF). The report claims that violence against journalists, including police violence, attacks by Maoist fighters and retaliation by corrupt politicians and criminal outfits inhibits press freedom in India. Six Indian journalists were reportedly killed in 2018 owing to their work. RSF further highlights dangers faced by journalists especially those working for regional media outlets in rural areas of the country. RSF has recorded that attacks against journalists by supporters of Prime Minister Narendra Modi increased in the run-up to general elections 2019.

The RSF report also states that female journalists in India are targeted on social media through hate campaigns and even receive threats of rape and murder. Journalists who criticise the authorities are often threatened with criminal prosecution and even gagged with Section 124A of the Indian Penal Code.

However, at the other end of the spectrum is also the fact that several print and television media in India have blatantly capitulated to the government of the day and are behaving like propagandists of a particular political party. This has eroded journalistic ethics. Perhaps such media groups believe that disseminating populist views helps them rake in the moolah. India is in the middle of an election. Can such blatantly partisan media add to the democratic ethos? Journalism is expected to rise above emotions and to filter out fake news especially during an election? Although the Chief Election Commission has warned of social media posts that border on hate speech by one or other political party and their followers, trolling of those holding dissenting views continues. Press freedom when conflated with social media turns into an ugly cocktail.
