Morning top 5: Drogheda violence; New tech to tackle prison drones

The Minister for Justice has said he will not tolerate a small number of people terrorising the local population of Drogheda.

Charlie Flanagan was speaking alongside the Garda Commissioner Drew Harris at a press conference at Drogheda Garda Station late last night.

In the last six months there have been at least 74 serious crime incidents in the Louth town – including a number of petrol bomb attacks and an attempted murder within the last week.

Advertisement

It is believed the attacks are linked to a feud between two crime gangs fighting for control of the drug trade in the area.

***

Prison bosses are to test new technology which would prevent drones smuggling contraband into Irish prisons.

The issue was discussed at the annual conference of the Prison Officers Association yesterday which was addressed by Justice Minister Charlie Flanagan.

Delegates heard that in one week last March, 50 packages, some of which contained drugs, were either thrown or flown by drone into Wheatfield Prison.

Full body scanners, similar to those at Heathrow Airport, are also being considered for prison entrances.

***

Voters in Britain appear to have signalled their anger with the ongoing Brexit turmoil – with the two main parties losing ground in local elections.

Both the Conservative and Labour Parties lost control of councils, with a significant swell in support for the pro-remain Liberal Democrats.

The Liberal Democrats took more than 180 seats in England – with predictions the party could make as many as 500 gains when votes are counted across the UK.

The first results from Northern Ireland aren't expected until this afternoon.

***

The actor who played the Star Wars character Chewbacca has died at the age of 74.

Peter Mayhew died surrounded by loved ones in his north Texas home, according to a statement from his family.

The actor played Chewbacca in the original Star Wars trilogy, Episode 3 of the prequels and in the New Trilogy.

He was working at a London hospital when he was cast in the films – with director George Lucas looking for someone taller than Darth Vadar (who was 6ft 6in). Mayhew stood 7ft 3in.

***

More than a million people have been evacuated from their homes in the northeast of India as an extremely powerful cyclone makes landfall.

Cyclone Fani is one of the most powerful storms to hit the country in years.

Winds of 150kph have been churning up the Bay of Bengal – and are forecast to reach speeds of 200kph at the height of the storm.

Officials have opened more than 850 shelters for displaced residents which are believed to be capable of holding around one million people.
