Delegations from Karnataka in Mumbai to seek water release into Krishna

Two delegations of leaders from Belagavi and Bagalkot left for Mumbai on Friday to meet Ministers of Maharashtra seeking water release into the Krishna river.

One team, led by Rajya Sabha member Prabhakar Kore, wants to meet Maharashtra Chief Minister Devendra Fadnavis. Meanwhile, the other team, including Srimanth Patil, MLA for Kagawad, and Anand Nyamagouda, MLA for Jamakhandi, met Maharashtra Irrigation Minister Girish Mahajan on arrival.

“We requested him to release at least 2 tmcft of water into the Krishna. The Minister was very attentive and listened to us. He agreed to release water in a couple of days,” Mr. Patil said.

He said that Maharashtra has been releasing water to Karnataka’s border villages on humanitarian grounds for decades. “We told the Minister that this practice should continue and he agreed,” he said.

Mr. Kore’s office said there was no update till 6 p.m. on whether Mr. Fadnavis met the delegation.

In Belagavi, farmers in Chikkodi and Kagawad submitted a memorandum to Chief Minister H.D. Kumaraswamy urging him to speak to Mr. Fadnavis to release water from the Koyna dam to save crops. They warned of stopping all vehicles on national highways connecting Karnataka and Maharashtra that pass through Belagavi.

Farmers stopped vehicles on a road in Manjari village on Thursday. Kannada organisations also urged the State government to request Maharashtra to release water. “Our MPs and MLAs are very quick to rush to Bengaluru, Mumbai, or New Delhi when their personal interests are threatened. But they don’t act as fast when the district’s interests need to be protected,” said Ashok Chandargi, convener of the Kannada organisations that submitted the memorandum. “If they don’t act now, we will gherao them when they come to their constituencies.”

Erratic and lower-than-average rainfall in the last two cropping seasons has affected farming activity in the border villages in Belagavi, Bagalkot, and Vijayapura districts. Water scarcity in the Krishna, Bhima, Ghataprabha, and Malaprabha has also caused problems in several villages. The Belagavi district administration is supplying water through tankers in 80 villages.

Officials believe around 1 tmcft of water is necessary for the drinking water needs of border villages and towns in Belagavi, Vijayapura and Bagalkot districts alone till the monsoon arrives.
