A fight among equals in Indore

ROBINSINGH@TRIBUNE.COM

Vibha Sharma

Tribune News Service

Indore, May 3

It is close to midnight, but Indore’s famous Sarafa Bazaar (jewellery market) is bustling. However, at this time of the night, people are not here to buy gold or silver, but tickle their taste buds with the culinary flavours of the financial city of Madhya Pradesh, also the cleanest city of India.

Though a couple of jewellery shops are still open. Who knows when someone, after relishing the food delights, may feel like spending a couple of lakhs on jewellery. The food street comes to life around 9 pm, when the jewellery market behind the Rajwada Palace of the Holkar dynasty, which is also now being restored, closes down.

No one is clear about the exact origin of this unique Sarafa Bazaar. But frequent visitors say it was encouraged by jewellery shop owners so that the hustle and bustle around food joints in the night would keep their shops secure even after they close down. Therefore, they willingly offered space in front of their shops to food vendors to set up their business in the night.

The late-night food street, a visit to which is a must if one is here in Indore, is the example of far-sightedness of smart business community who has made the city its home, turning it into an active hub of different trades, be it precious metals, cloth or grain.

Over the time new businesses have come up and the traditional city is as modern as any of the cosmopolitan cities like Pune, Hyderabad or Chandigarh with multi-brand top-end showrooms.

Largely the habitat of traders and business community, the city is known for its affluence. The “mini-Mumbai” as it is also called, Indore is home to traditional business Gujarati, Sindhi and Marwari communities and they are not happy with the Narendra Modi government’s double whammy of demonitisation and GST.

Nitin Jain, a young professional in the field, calls the GST “an excellent move” but because it was “not implemented properly, together with ‘notebandi’, it proved ‘ghatak’ (deadly) for business here. While businesses are suffering, ruling the roost are tax consultants and chartered accountants.”

This and the fact that these are the first elections in 30 years being fought without the favourite ‘tai’, Speaker of the outgoing Lok Sabha, Sumitra Mahajan. Indore is seeing for the first time in many years a “fight among equals”. In the words of Arvind Tiwari, president of Indore Press Club: It is the first time in several years that the Congress is giving the BJP a good fight in the Malwa-Nimar region, and which makes the elections in Indore, if not as electrifying as Bhopal, but equally important.

The two main contestants, BJP’s Shankar Lalwani and Congress’ Pankaj Sanghvi, are both local and belong to business community. Whether Singhvi gets the advantage of the prevailing anger among traders remains to be seen, but local BJP leaders here classify him as a “habitual loser”. He has fought many elections unsuccessfully, the only time he ever won was when he was in the BJP, says DN Tiwari, a local BJP leader

But then with Mahajan being benched, the saffron party is also struggling with a handicap. Over the years she has built her own group of supporters, who are feeling let-down over the way she has been “treated” by Prime Minister Narendra Modi and chief Amit Shah, say Congress supporters. Singhvi, they say, is in a position to give Lalwani a scare.

In spite of many losses, Sanghvi cannot be taken lightly. “He also contested against Sumitra Mahajan but lost with around 45,000 votes. She too acknowledged that Singhvi had given her a good fight,” says Tiwari.

In 2014, Sumitra Mahajan got a whooping 8,54,972 votes against Satyanarayan Patel of the Congress, who polled 3,88, 071. There was also a BSP candidate then like there is one now. He, however, could manage just 7,422 votes.

Clearly the fight was and is between the BJP and the Congress. In the 2018 Assembly elections, the Congress won four of the eight Assembly constituencies here making it a more equal fight than any other elections in past three decade. Lalwani is also the only one from the Sindhi community contesting these elections

Indore will poll in the last phase. So there are still 15 days to go and many things can happen that can change the mood of the city that sleeps late, enjoys good food and believes in making money.

It’s Shankar Lalwani vs Pankaj Sanghvi in ‘mini-Mumbai’
