Election Commission issues warning to KCR for model code of conduct violation

Election Commission issues warning to KCR for model code of conduct violation

The Election Commission in its notice held that K Chandrashekar Rao had violated the Model Code of Conduct (MCC) with his election speech at Karimnagar on March 17.

news Election Commission

The Election commission of India (ECI) on Friday issued a warning to Telangana Chief Minister K Chandrashekar Rao for violating the Model Code of Conduct (MCC) with his election speech at Karimnagar on March 17. The poll body has asked the Chief Minister to be more careful in future and adhere to the provisions of MCC while addressing public rally meetings or making any public statements.

The Election Commission issued the warning based on a complaint filed by Vishwa Hindu Parishad president M Rama Raju who claimed that KCR made derogatory remarks during an election rally at Karimnagar on March 17.

On March 17, KCR in his speech had referred to the Bharatiya Janata Party (BJP) and said, "Ee Hindu Gaalu...bondu baalu...dikkumalina...daridrapu gaalu…desham lo aggi petale, gattar levale.” It loosely translates in English to: “These (self-proclaimed) Hindus are useless and disgusting…They want to stoke fire in the country and belong in the gutter.”

The ECI had on April 9 too issued a notice saying the KCR speech violated its MCC guidelines and had prima facie found that Rao's remarks had the potential of disturbing the harmony and aggravating the existing differences between social and religious communities.

On Friday, ECI principal secretary SK Rudola, issued an order saying, “While considering the contents of the public speech made by Chandrasekhar Rao, the ECI is of the view that by delivering such speech, KCR has violated the provisions of MCC which specifies that no political party or candidate shall indulge in any activity which may create mutual hatred. The Commission cautions him to be more careful in future and to strictly adhere to the provisions of MCC while addressing any public rally or meeting or making any public statement,” the Election Commission notice states.

In response to the ECI notice in April, KCR had stated that his speech was misunderstood by the complainant and that his speech was widely reported in electronic and print media.

The poll panel, however, has observed that KCR, being the president of a recognised political party and being the Chief Minister of the state, has an added responsibility. The Chief Minister should not only uphold the basic tenets, including secularism of the Constitution of India but also to display the same in his public appearances or speeches as well, observed ECI.
