Easter Sunday suicide bombers travelled to Kashmir, Kerala for training, claims Sri Lanka army chief

Easter attackers travelled to Kashmir, Kerala: SL army chief | Photo Credit: PTI

Colombo: The Sri Lankan army chief has claimed that some of the suicide bombers who carried out multiple bombings in the island nation on Easter Sunday had visited Kashmir, Kerala and Bengaluru in India to possibly get training in terrorism activities.

Lieutenant General Mahesh Senanayke said though the exact reason for their visit is not yet known, it is being suspected that the attackers travelled to India to establish their links with other terrorist organisations.

"They had gone to India, travelling to Bangalore, Kashmir and Kerala state, (according to) information available with us,” the army commander said in an interview to the BBC.

“Possibly for some sort of training or to make some more links towards the other organisations outside the country,” he replied when asked about the purpose of those visits.

On April 21, nine suicide bombers carried out terror attacks in three churches and four high-end hotels of Sri Lanka, claiming lives of 253 people and injuring over 500. The Islamic State – the Syria-based terror group claimed the responsibility of the serial blasts.

The National Investigation Agency (NIA) recently carried out raids in Tamil Nadu and Kerala and nabbed several people for suspected link with the ISIS.

On April 27, the probe agency took a native of Kerala's Kollam, Faizal into its custody on suspicion of having direct contacts with Sohran Hashif, one of the conspirators behind the Colombo blasts.

The NIA later detained three more persons from Kerala’s Palakkad and Kasaragode based on the information gathered from Faizal.

Earlier, it was reported that India had warned the Sri Lankan intelligence officials about possible attacks by Islamist State militants hours before the Easter bombings. The Indian authorities were reportedly tipped off about the probable attacks by an arrested ISIS suspect.
