Nothing new about surgical strikes, took place before Modi government too: Lt General (Retd) DS Hooda

Lt General (Retd) DS Hooda with Congress president Rahul Gandhi | Photo Credit: IANS

New Delhi: On Congress's claim of six surgical strikes carried out during UPA tenure Lt General (Retd) DS Hooda said that the India Army carried out many such strikes in the past even before the Modi government came to power. Call it surgical strikes or call it cross border operations, said Hooda and added that he’s not aware of exact dates and areas that have been brought out.

Earlier, rejecting BJP’s charge that Congress was soft on terror the grand old party claimed that six surgical strikes were conducted during Manmohan Singh government.

Addressing the briefing Congress leader Rajiv Shukla gave exact dates and locations of the strikes carried out by the Indian Army across Pakistan occupied Kashmir. Shukla further claimed that two surgical strikes were carried out when Atal Bihari Vajpayee was the PM.

Reacting on this revelation PM Narendra Modi raised suspicion over the claims of surgical strikes during UPA tenure and termed them as "strikes carried out on paper while sitting in AC rooms".

Later, Congress president Rahul Gandhi launched a scathing attack on the PM for raising suspicion over the claims and asserted that he was insulting the Army.

"The Army, Air Force or Navy is not personal properties of Narendra Modi ji like he thinks. When he says that surgical strikes during UPA were done in video games then he is not insulting Congress, but the Army. These air strikes were done by the Army and we do not politicize the Army. The Prime Minister should not insult the Army," IANS quoted Gandhi as saying.

Hooda, who was the Northern Army Commander during the 'surgical strike' in September 2016, had recently prepared a comprehensive report on India’s national security after he was roped in by the grand old party to prepare it.

Considered as the chief architect of the 2016 surgical strikes Lt General (Retd) Hooda retired in November 2016 after serving in the Indian Army for nearly 40 years.
