More the mud Rahul Gandhi throws at me, better the lotus will bloom: PM Modi in Madhya Pradesh

New Delhi:

With the Phase five of 2019 Lok Sabha elections less than 24 hours to go, Prime Minister Narendra Modi on Sunday came out with all his gun blazing at Congress president Rahul Gandhi, saying his alleged association with UK firm Backops were being "unearthed from land, air and water". Addressing an election rally in Madhya Pradesh's Sagar, the prime minister said the "naamdar" gets exposed every time he tries to malign him and the more, he is targeted, the more 'lotus' will bloom.

Modi's latest jibe comes on the heels of Home Ministry's recent notice on Gandhi, saying it received a representation from BJP MP Subramanian Swamy, claiming that a company named Backops Limited was registered in the United Kingdom in 2003 with the Congress leader as one of its directors.

Swamy's letter also mentioned that in the British company's annual returns filed on October 10, 2005 and October 31, 2006, Gandhi's date of birth has been given as June 19, 1970 and had declared his nationality as British, the Home Ministry added.

In an apparent refence to Gandhi, Modi further asked, "He owned a company called Backops in England which was shut in 2009. But in 2011, a partner in the company got a submarine deal contract. The government was of the Congress. How did the Backops partner get the deal, what was his experience in defence contract?"

PM Modi in Sagar,Madhya Pradesh: Chahe remote se sarkar chalani ho ya phir video game khelna ho,actor se zayada yeh log soch nahi pate.Tabhi toh Prime Minister in making ke samajhdar hone ke intezar mein Congress ne 10 saal tak iss desh par ek acting Prime Minister thop diya tha. pic.twitter.com/Isrc7KYM4U — ANI (@ANI) May 5, 2019

The prime minister also alleged that due to Congress "criminal apathy", people in India have been deprived of basic amenities like pucca houses, electricity, toilets and bank accounts during the first 25 years of Independence.

"Had the Congress remained in power, I am confident that basic amenities would have alluded the country for another 100 years," Modi went on to claim further.

Modi said perpetrators of terrorism are now fully aware that it is a new India which hits them back by entering their dens. "Your each vote in favour of Modi will inspire him to fight against terrorism with vigour," the prime minister said while concluding his speech.

Phase Five of General Election will be held in 51 constituencies, including 7 of the 29 Lok Sabha seats in Madhya Pradesh on Monday, i.e. May 6, 2019. The seats which will witness polling in Madhya Pradesh are Tikamgarh, Damoh, Khajuraho, Satna, Rewa, Hoshangabad and Betul. The counting of votes will be taken up on May 23.
