Australia's education approach to India "not sustainable"

Mr Kant, who is one of the top planning advisers to Prime Minister Narendra Modi, said the first stage of reform involved deregulating India's top-60 universities and allowing them to charge fees, hire staff and create courses without any official intervention. The aim was to create universities of global standing, similar to Harvard and Stanford.

Since India would eventually train most its own graduates, it would be better to be part of the changes in India and not just charging fees to students to come to Australia.

"I don't think any Australian university is in India for charity. Nobody will invest in India without a rate of return." — Amitabh Kant, Natioonal Institution for Transforming India.

Mr Kant said he recognised it had to be financially rewarding for an Australian university to set up in India.

"I don't think any Australian university is in India for charity. Nobody will invest in India without a rate of return."

Decent returns possible

Advertisement

India's corporate sector had invested in two private universities, Ashoka and BML Munjal on the outskirts of Delhi, which was evidence a decent rate of return was possible.

"People who come to India to collaborate will strike a business partnership. It's not feasible for business to come to India without getting a return. But that's possible given growth is around 7.5 per cent and the long-term growth objective is 9 to 10 per cent within three years."

Australian higher education institutions' first step should be to do joint courses and degrees, and take a stake in Indian campuses, Mr Kant said.

India would have a $US10 trillion ($14 trillion) economy by 2030, which would give it much greater geopolitical significance. This could not happen without education which would stimulate growth which was why the Modi government had taken its first steps towards deregulation of higher education.

Last week the Singapore Ministry of Health said it would no longer recognise the medical qualifications of three Australian universities because it was able to meet demand for doctors from its own medical schools. The universities involved said they would would modify their foot prints in Asia to reach into new markets.

The vice chancellor of the Indian Institute of Technology Delhi, professor Ramgopal Rao, will give the keynote address at the Australian Financial Review Higher Education Summit 2019, on August 27 and 28, in Brisbane. www.afrhighered.com.au
