Mangaluru Muslims condemn Sri Lanka terror attacks, stand in solidarity with Christians

MANGALURU: In the wake of Sri Lanka terror attacks , Muslims from Mangaluru gathered at the Milagres Church premise in support of peace and solidarity. They offered dates and water to Christians, who walked out of the church after attending the Sunday morning mass.Asif Deals and Saif Sultan decided to bring the community together. Speaking on the sidelines of the event that lasted for about 20 minutes, Saif Sultan told TOI, "Liberals or people who want peace are really silent. It is high time that people come to the streets and say that we do not support terrorism. The majority only want a normal life and peace. Someone from our community has done it, but we do not represent them. Since the holy month of Ramadan is coming up, we decided to offer dates and water and hold a silent protest. This has sent out a very positive message," he said.The team has already received calls from 16 different places in Dakshina Kannada, Bengaluru and Chennai asking how to organize similar protest. "It is a beautiful idea of brotherhood and humanity. The response from the Christian community has been great. The church priests, church goers, appreciated the move," said Saif, hoping to organize a similar protest in another church soon.Parish Priest Valerian D’Souza said, "We are happy to have Muslim brethren with us in our campus expressing their solidarity with us. We recalled what happened on the Easter Day in Sri Lanka and we as a family condemn such terrorist activity. Through placards, the Muslims have expressed that they are with us. We want love and peace. We are grateful to all in the organisation who thought about this. The message is powerful, though they were no speeches," he said.Dr. Edmond Fernandes, CEO, CHD Group, who was present at the church premise said, "The solidarity expressed by the Muslim brethren at the Church of Our Lady of Miracles stands as a testimony of soft power around the region that humanity will survive more strongly and that deviated outfits will be destroyed. Silence is an answer too, at times."
