Attack on me was an attack on the people of Delhi: Kejriwal

Appeals to ‘Modi bhakts’ to refrain from making an individual greater than the nation

Chief Minister Arvind Kejriwal on Sunday said the attack on him was an attack on the people of Delhi and they would retaliate in the Lok Sabha election.

On Saturday, Mr. Kejriwal was slapped by a man during his roadshow in West Delhi’s Moti Nagar.

Mr. Kejriwal alleged that the Bharatiya Janata Party was targeting him because he was speaking against Prime Minister Narendra Modi and his relationship with Pakistan.

He appealed to “Modi bhakts” to think about the nation before making an individual greater than the country.

‘9th attack in 5 years’

Addressing a press conference on Sunday, he said, “In the past 5 years, this is the 9th attack on me. After becoming the Chief Minister, this is the 5th time. The BJP is responsible for the lapses in the security, which is the Centre’s responsibility.”

The Delhi police cannot be blamed for the incident, he said, adding that it was a conspiracy by the BJP.

“Nine times is not a lapse. It is by design. The BJP and Congress cannot stand the fact that an aam aadmi [common man] is in politics. Hence, they are making life difficult for all the members of AAP with CBI raids, arrests, and personal attacks. We have worked hard for the betterment of Delhi and the results are showing. Therefore, the BJP is scared that people will ask if the government can do it then why cannot you in other States? I am not scared by these attacks...it makes me stronger. It will not kill my voice or my spirit,” Mr. Kejriwal said.

The attacker was a “Modi bhakts” and not a disgruntled AAP supporter as the police had initially said, he alleged.

“This is a sign of the dictatorship of Modi — whoever speaks against him is silenced. Leaders from across the country are calling me with their support and raising voice against the dictatorship or Modi,” he added.

Soon after the attack, Mr. Kejriwal said, he wondered as to what he has said in public in the past few days that could enrage people to an extent that they attack him.

“I realised that in various interviews to media, I have questioned the link between our Prime Minister and Pakistan. In the last 70 years or so, no head of the neighbouring country has said a particular candidate should win and become the Prime Minister again. Why is Imran Khan [Pakistan PM] rooting for Mr. Modi after he ordered the Armed forces to go in Pakistan and kill terrorists? What is going on between Mr. Modi and leaders from Pakistan? He even made an unscheduled stop to wish former Pakistan PM Nawaz Sharif on his birthday,” Mr. Kejriwal said.

Opposition reacts

Reacting to the allegations made by Mr. Kejriwal, Leader of the Opposition in the Delhi Assembly, Vijender Gupta from BJP said that the Chief Minister was “doing drama” to boost his campaign. “He is trying to give the incident a political angle to gain sympathy even though the attacker was a disgruntle AAP worker,” Mr. Gupta alleged.

Former Delhi Chief Minister and Delhi Congress Chief Sheila Dixit condemned the attack and said, “Such attacks should not happen no matter who is the leader.”
