One tonne of banned plastics seized from Tasmac shops, bars

Raids will continue, say officials; fines will be imposed from June

The Chennai Corporation conducted a mass raid on Sunday at Tamil Nadu State Marketing Corporation Limited (Tasmac) shops and bars in the city to search for banned plastic items.

Stating that the raids on establishments selling and stocking plastic materials would continue throughout this month, civic officials said they would start imposing fines from the first week of June.

In the raids carried out at more than 300 Tasmac shops in 15 zones of the city, more than one tonne of plastics were seized, said a senior official of the Health Department.

The seized items included cups, plates and covers. The raids covered the bars, hawkers and petty shops located near the liquor shops.

From the time the plastic ban kicked in from January 1 this year, the civic body has been carrying out awareness drives among residents and shop keepers to avoid using the plastics. “The raids will intensify. The Corporation will start imposing fines on those stocking plastic materials from June 1,” the senior official said.

Curbing the use of plastic was difficult as people had been using it for a long time, officials said, adding that eliminating their use would need some time.

Tamil Nadu Vanigar Sangankalin Peramaippu president A.M. Vikramaraja said local industries were not manufacturing one-time use plastics after the ban kicked in. “Instead of taking action against small vendors and traders, who sell for a few hundred rupees daily, the government must stop vehicles that bring plastics from other States. If they start imposing fines, we will hold protests.”

To intensify

Once the election results are out, raids will be carried out at big commercial shops and bulk sellers of plastic materials and strict action will be taken against shops stocking the banned materials, officials said.

S. Wilson, a trader in Kandanchavady along Rajiv Gandhi Salai, said Corporation officials had warned traders that they would seize plastics found in shops.

“Despite the ban, the material is freely available in the city. Unless alternatives are available in large numbers, consumers will continue to ask for plastic bags and traders will have no other go but to provide them,” he said.
