Hyderabad: Man beaten, returns from maoist den

A police officer reported the people/abductees were being taken to the Karigundem forests near Bijapur.

Hyderabad: On the eve of the first phase of local bodies elections, three persons were abducted allegedly by Maoists, and two of them are believed to have been killed.

Reports claim that the Maoists kidnapped Bujji from Cherla mandal, Bhadradri Kothagudem district, Telangana, while the others/other two were kidnapped from Chhattisgarh. Further, while Bujji was released on Sunday, the two persons from Bijapur, Chhattisgarh, were killed by the Maoists.

Additionally, the Maoists had pasted posters all over Nagarkurnool district with messages asking the unemployed youth to join them in their fight against the government. They threatened to attack Chief Minister K. Chandrasekhar Rao and demanded that the Intermediate Board be shut down for the marks fiasco.

According to the Telangana police, the culprit Maoists hailed from the Chhattisgarh border area. Apparently, they abducted Bujji and the others on the suspicion of them being police informers and they threatened and even beat them up them pretty badly. Bujji, who returned to his village on Sunday morning, narrated his entire ordeal to the police.

A police officer reported the people/abductees were being taken to the Karigundem forests near Bijapur. "The Maoists, who have been failing to land a breakthrough, are now trying to influence locals not to accept the various benefits and facilities being provided by the state government," he said.

Regarding the posters threatening Mr K. Chandrasekhar Rao, another senior police official explained the Maoists were unable to make a wave in the state and were therefore attempting to make their presence felt by pasting posters and threatening the public.

In light of the local body elections which have been scheduled to be conducted at Cherla and Dummugudem mandals in Kothagudem on Monday, a meeting was held by the senior police officials of the state to review the prevailing security conditions.
