State sponsored persecution of religious minorities

Suppression of a voice leads to the emergence of that idea. The world has witnessed this phenomenon repeatedly. Persecution of Christians right after the death of the Christ, persecution of Jews due to their ethnicity or persecution of Ahmadi Muslim due to their religious beliefs.

Every persecution leads to the advancement of the persecuted community. Same happened with the persecuted sect of Muslims; the Ahmadiyya Muslim Community.

This is the state’s responsibility to protect the rights of its citizens irrespective of their ethnicity, caste, creed or religious believes. According to the United Nation’s resolution of religious rights, every state is bound to protect the rights of the religious minorities as well.

There are countries like Pakistan, Algeria, Syria, Iraq, Lybia, Saudi Arabia where this rule is not practiced much. Especially in the Muslim majority nations, the rule is being ignored as it doesn’t even exist. There are numerous events and incidents have been recorded where religious minorities are persecuted in Saudi Arabia, and it’s neighboring and supporting countries. The United Nation and its constitutional bodies are ignored by many countries and the UN never step forward to take any action against these countries.

During 1974, in Pakistan, The Ahmadiyya Muslim Community was constitutionally declared non-Muslim in the country’s so-called Islamic law. Islam talks about the protection of religious rights of other minorities but the life long action of these so-called Islamic countries led everyone to think the opposite.

During the month of February 2019, the Ahmadiyya community had organized their community gathering in Bangladesh. But, ISIS and Hamas supported Khatm-e-Nabuwat Andoln group attacked the Ahmadiyya headquarters in the village. Local police indirectly supported the notorious Islamist group against Ahmadiyya Muslims.

Pro-Caliphate movement Khatm-e-Nabuwat

In more than 30 countries, the Khatm-e-Nabuwat movement is active with different names as Tahaffuz Khatm-e-Nabuwat, Khatm-e-Nabuwat Andoln, Majlis Khatm-e-Nabuwat and so on. All these groups follow the pro-Caliphate agenda of Islamists.

In many countries, these organizations are declared terrorist outfits and in some these are banned to operate.

Discrimination of Police against Ahmadis in Bangladesh

In recent events, it has been noticed that the local police in Bangladesh is being discriminatory against Ahmadiyya Muslims. Even after more than 50 days of the attack on the Ahmadiyya community in Bangladesh, police has not registered even a single case against the culprits. In this ISIS proclaimed attack more than 50 Ahmadis were seriously injured and more than $3 million worth of business was looted and destroyed by the terrorists. Later that day ISIS claimed the attack as they did in 2015 when a suicide bomber strikes the Ahmadiyya mosque in Bangladesh.

Advertisement

Prime Minister Sheikh Hasina and her powered league did not take any action against this attack. The Eastern Herald reported the instigation of this attack 4 days prior to the incident in a special report. Government of Bangladesh ignored the threat posed by the notorious pro-caliphate radical Islamist group. Even a night before the attack, notorious kingpin of pro-Caliphate group Khatm-e-Nabuwat was sharing the dinner table with the ruling elites while planning the attack against Ahmadis.

No country is coming forward in support of this religious minority anywhere in the world.

The community has a population of more than 200 million around the world. Their concept of Jihad is adopted by the literate people and liberal scholars as it doesn’t involve the use of power or weapons.

If powerful countries like the United States, France, and Germany, etc. do not dare to come forward to protect the rights of this most modern Muslim community. The cause of the Ahmadiyya community is so strong that while fighting them all these small notorious groups of goons found power and formed groups like ISIS and Hamas, etc. around the world.

Sword can win territories but not hearts. Forces can bend heads, but not minds.— Hazrat Mirza Tahir Ahmad,(4th Caliph of the Ahmadiyya Muslim Community worldwide.) Advertisement

The only Muslim Nobel laureate in science, Prof. Dr. Abdus Salam who was an Ahmadi Muslim was forced to leave his country Pakistan due to his religious beliefs. Prof. Salam

never compromised with these radical Islamist groups and remained their strong opposer. Professor Salam is famous for his fundamental work on the experiment of God’s particle and theory of electromagnetic interaction. Dr. Salam is the first scientist to discover electroweak interaction.

Today, thousands of Ahmadi students are working hard to excel. Mostly in the domain of Science, Mathematics, Economics, Literature, and Medicines. Ms. Aniqa, who is a cancer studies scholar at Panjab University Chandigarh, India wrote an article titled “Not for Muslims; Cancer and Diabetes Cure by Israeli Scientists by 2020” said “We Ahmadi students always look for the better opportunity to excel in education. Our target is not to get employed in a good organization but to contribute to humanity.” Aniqa further added “We, being Ahmadi Muslims are considered non-Muslim by all other Muslim groups. Wherever we go we are targeted, even in India. Many don’t get their admissions approved because non-Muslims discriminate us being Muslims and in other cases, Muslims discriminate us for being Ahmadis. We love our country but today, it is a very difficult situation for us in India too. If not today, the superpowers come to support Ahmadi students, the situation may worsen the many other countries too.”

Persecution for any community should never be acceptable to any society. Persecution is an attack on human rights. If humans are treated with no human rights then what is the meaning of these big human rights groups? If superpower nations who advocate greater human rights and values can’t raise these concerns in the international community then they are not worthy of called as world powers.
