Woman injured after drinking ‘fire shot’ in Bengaluru, police book hotel staff

Woman injured after drinking ‘fire shot’ in Bengaluru, police book hotel staff

The woman and her colleagues accused the hotel staff of being rude after the incident was reported.

news Accident

A 42-year-old aviation industry professional was hurt after she had a flaming drink at a Bengaluru hotel on Friday night at around 11.30 pm.

In a complaint to the police, the Delhi-based woman said that pieces of the glass broke because of the heat and it resulted in her mouth getting cut. Fortunately for her, she said that she stopped before swallowing the pieces.

The woman's colleague RC Panwar told Whitefield Police that the incident occurred when she and her colleagues met for dinner and chose to try the fire shot at a hotel called The Den. According to Panwar, the bartender asked them to close their eyes and gulp the drink.

“However, the victim felt a piece of glass in her mouth and fortunately did not swallow it. She spat it out but it had cut her mouth,” police told The Hindu. Police have booked the staff under sections 337 (causing hurt by endangering life) and 506 (criminal intimidation) of the Indian Penal Code.

Panwar and others also alleged that the bar manager and other hotel staff were rude to the complainants when they raised the issue.

However, this is not the first instance where people have complained about injuries after trying a fiery drink. Ashok Nagar police in the city had previously booked one bar staff for negligence in February following a similar incident. The 28-year-old woman lawyer had filed a criminal complaint against the bar located on Residency Road, after a fire shot drink left her with severe burns.

At that time, the woman had alleged that the hotel staff denied any help on that occasion and blamed her for not holding the glass in a correct position.

“We sincerely regret an unfortunate incident that took place in our premises with one of our valued guest. Customer care is at the center of our business and we are committed by holding ourselves to the highest ethical standards and practices. We are complying with the law and will extend our full cooperation to all concerned parties” Vinesh Gupta, General Manager, The Den said following the incident.
