Pak shells Poonch, Rajouri villages, forward posts

Pak shells Poonch, Rajouri villages, forward posts

Army officer, porter injured

MENDHAR, May 5: An army officer and a porter were injured on Sunday as Pakistan army resorted to heavy mortar shelling and small arms firing on forward Indian posts and villages in Krishna Ghati, Mankote and Keri sectors on and along the Line of Control (LoC) in Poonch and Rajouri districts.

PRO Defence Lt Col Devender Anand, while confirming ceasefire violation, said, “At about 1100 hours, Pak initiated unprovoked ceasefire violation by shelling with artillery and firing of small arms along LoC in Krishna Ghati sector in Mendhar of district Poonch and Keri sector of Rajouri district. Indian army retaliated befittingly.”

Local official sources said that in heavy Pak firing that continued till 3.00 PM, a Colonel-rank officer was injured in Krishna Ghati sector of Poonch district while a 25-year-old porter suffered splinter injuries when a mortar shell exploded near him in Keri sector of Rajouri district. Both the injured were evacuated to a hospital and their condition was stated to be stable, the sources said.

Late evening reports suggested that four soldiers were injured besides Colonel rank officer in exchange of firing in Poonch and Rajouri sectors. However, there was no official confirmation on this account.

Earlier, heavy exchange of fire took place between two sides on the Line of Control (LoC) in Poonch and Rajouri districts after a brief lull on Sunday. For the last three days, the two armies traded fire on the LoC in Shahpur, Kerni and Krishna Ghati sectors of Poonch district. The exchange of fire continued up to 3.30 PM. Major targets of Pakistan shells were Mankote, Naar, Bobby camp villages in Mankote sector.

This morning, Pakistan army lobbed mortars and opened fire from small arms at forward posts and villages in Keri sector along the LoC in Rajouri district as well. Unprovoked shelling and firing from across the border in the two sectors prompted the Indian army to give a befitting response.

The police officials said the shelling was intense in both the sectors, causing panic among the people who were asked to stay indoors to avoid any casualty. The cross-border firing stopped around 1.15 PM in Krishna Ghati sector, only to resume again around 3.25 PM till 5.15 PM, they said.

A police officer said that the army porter Mohammad Mahroof son of Makhan Mohammad a resident of Challas village received critical splinter injuries after Pakistan army targeted Indian army posts in the area. Mahroof suffered splinter injuries when a mortar shell exploded near him in Keri sector, they said, adding he was given immediate medical aid and was later evacuated to an army command hospital. Two residential houses were also damaged, while a few cattle also perished in the Pakistani shelling, the officials said. They said the casualties suffered by Pakistan in the retaliatory action were not known immediately.

Ending over a fortnight long lull, Pakistan Thursday targetted Shahpur and Kerni sectors of Poonch, followed by firing in Qasba sector in the same district, the next day.

Ten people, including four soldiers, have been killed and over 50 people injured in Rajouri and Poonch districts since India's February 26 air strike on a JeM terror camp in Pakistan's Balakot in response to the Pulwama terror strike that left 40 CRPF personnel dead.
