Sea breeze to city’s rescue

Thunderstorms forecast at a few places after May 9

The Meteorological Department has issued a warning that a heat wave will prevail in interior parts of the State till Wednesday, advising people not to expose themselves to direct sunlight during the day to prevent heat strokes.

The mercury level soared to 43.5 degree Celsius in Tiruttani and nearly 42 degree Celsius in Tiruchi on Monday. N. Puviarasan, director, Area Cyclone Warning Centre, said north and northwesterly winds dominate till noon. The day temperature escalates to above normal temperature due to the delay in the onset of sea breeze.

“We expect the heat wave condition to lose grip over the region after May 9 as cool easterlies are bound to become stronger. This would also increase the chances for thunderstorm in interior areas and Western Ghats,” he said.

Vellore gets rain

Some places in Krishnagiri and Vellore districts received 8 cm and 5 cm of rainfall on Sunday. The interior districts may get a respite as thunderstorms with gusty winds are likely to develop over the next three days.

Coastal areas like Chennai had a slight respite on Monday as the sea breeze set in around noon.

Chennai’s day temperature has been oscillating for the past two days depending on the onset of the sea breeze.

On Monday, the weather stations in Nungambakkam and Meenambakkam recorded 38.6 degree Celsius and 41.2 degree Celsius respectively. This is slightly higher than temperature registered on Sunday.

Weather experts noted that the State experienced hot days normally during the second half of the month. Y.E.A.Raj, a weather expert, said a heat wave swept some parts of the State, including Chennai, in the beginning of May as Cyclone Fani took away the moisture.

Chennai witnessed 10 hot days in May 2017 when the maximum temperature went up beyond the 40-degree mark. The mercury level touched 42.6 degree Celsius, the highest, in Nungambakkam on May 19 that year.

Chennai received 208 mm of rainfall in May 2016 because of Cyclone Roanu. Otherwise, the number of rainy days is limited to two in May for Chennai, he added.
