Heat wave warning issued for TN, Thiruthani records highest temp of 43.5 degrees

Heat wave warning issued for TN, Thiruthani records highest temp of 43.5 degrees

Many parts of Tamil Nadu recorded temperatures of more than 40 degree Celsius on Monday.

news Weather

The Indian Meteorological Department (IMD) has issued a heat wave warning for isolated places in Tamil Nadu till Wednesday. In a weather bulletin released on Monday, the IMD said, “Heat wave conditions are likely to prevail over isolated places of Tamil Nadu.”

The warning comes on a day when a lot of places across Tamil Nadu recorded day temperatures of over 40 degree Celsius. Thiruthani recorded the highest temperature of 43.5 degree Celsius on Wednesday while Karur Paramathi recorded a temperature of 42 degrees. Trichy (41.9), Chennai Airport (41.2) and Vellore (41.1) also recorded high temperatures through Monday. Madurai, Palayamkottai and Salem also sizzled on Monday with temperatures of 40.8, 40.5 and 40.5 degree Celsius respectively.

Meanwhile, the coastal areas in Tamil Nadu recorded sub-40 degree temperatures through Monday with Chennai (Nungambakkam) witnessing a temperature of 38.6 degree Celsius. Cuddalore (36), Kanyakumari (32.9), Nagapattinam (38.2), Pamban (34) and Thoothukudi (34) all recorded lower temperatures than interior Tamil Nadu.

According to the criteria set by the IMD, a heat wave is declared when the maximum temperature of a station reaches at least 40 degree Celsius in the plains, 37 degree Celsius in coastal regions and at least 30 degree Celsius in hilly regions.

Meanwhile, some portions of the state witnessed rainfall on Monday owing to convective activity over the region. According to independent weather blogger Chennai Rains, some parts of north interior Tamil Nadu and west interior Tamil Nadu could see isolated convective thunderstorms due to the intrusion of lower level Easterly winds and the moisture from sea breeze. According to IMD data, while Uthangarai (Krishnagiri) recorded a rainfall of 8 cms, Vellore (5cms), Penucondapuram-Krishnagiri (3cms), Harur-Dharmapuri and Alangayam-Vellore (2cms each), Melalathur – Vellore, Thammampatty – Salem, Gudiyatham – Vellore, Barur – Krishnagiri and Sholingur – Vellore recorded 1 cm each of rainfall on Monday.
