Chennai stares at severe drinking water crisis; people forced to pay bribe to get water

The city of Chennai requires 850 million litres of water, but the government is able to provide only 500 million litres. | Photo Credit: Getty Images

Chennai: As the summers are in full swing, Chennai has started to stare at a severe water crisis. The lakes providing the drinking water to the city have almost dried up. The residents are now forced to buy drinking water from private entities. Resident have to pay Rs 50 for 15 litres of water. Though the government claims the situation is under control, but reality paints a different picture.

The city of Chennai requires 850 million litres of water, but the government is able to provide only 500 million litres. Of the four lakes which provides water to the Chennai, only one lake has not dried up and is able to provide the water. People are getting the water only once in two days making the lives of the residents difficult.

Each family gets only 5 pots of water which is not sufficient to a family of four to five people. At certain places there is only one water tank where people are forced to stand in queues for hours to fetch the water. Experts say the situation is only going to get worse in the coming days as temperature is going to soar.

People start to stand in queues since 7 in the morning and many a times there have been fights over the getting the water.

Also, residents in many areas are forced to pay bribes to lorry drivers for transporting water from municipal department.

For now the metro water department claims they can tackle the crisis, but situation may get worse in the coming months.

Water conservationists say the city itself is responsible for water crisis due to its poor upkeep of the numerous water bodies. Chennai which has 10 million population faces water scarcity not only during summer months but throughout the year. NITI Aayog in 2018 had warned that Chennai will be devoid of fresh water in the coming decades.
