Bengaluru, parts of south interior, coastal Karnataka to witness thunderstorms on Tuesday

Bengaluru, parts of south interior, coastal Karnataka to witness thunderstorms on Tuesday

A thunderstorm warning has been issued for Bengaluru Rural, Bengaluru Urban, Chamarajanagar, Mysuru, Mandya, Ramanagara, Kolar, Chickaballpura, Tumakuru, Hassan, Chikkamagaluru, Shivamogga, Kodagu and Chitradurga.

news Weather

Bengaluru and parts of south interior Karnataka, coastal Karnataka and Malnad districts are likely to witness thunderstorms with scattered light to moderate rains, with isolated heavy rains and gusty winds.

The Indian Meteorological Department issued a thunderstorm warning to the Deputy Commissioners of Bengaluru Rural, Bengaluru Urban, Chamarajanagar, Mysuru, Mandya, Ramanagara, Kolar, Chickaballpura, Tumakuru, Hassan, Chikkamagaluru, Shivamogga, Kodagu and Chitradurga.

“Thunderstorm accompanied with gusty winds reaching 30 to 40 kmph and light to moderate spells of rain is likely to affect your district in next 03 hours,” the note said.

This is likely to bring down temperatures throughout the state, which is experiencing yet another year of deficient rainfall.

Deficient rainfall

Daily reports prepared by the state government show an overall 40% deficit of rainfall in the pre-monsoon season as of Monday.

The worst affected districts are Bidar, Udupi and Koppala, which have a deficit of 66%, 63% and 62% respectively in the period between March 1 and May 6.

Bengaluru Urban has a rainfall deficiency of 16% while Bengaluru Rural has a deficiency of 14%.

Drinking water

Successive drought years have resulted in the drying up of the traditional sources of water in many parts of the state forcing the government to supply drinking water through tankers. A total of 1,324 villages are getting water through 2,177 tankers operated by the State Emergency Operation Centre as part of drought relief measures.

Deaths due to weather related disasters

So far in the same pre-monsoon period between March 1 and May 6, 20 people have lost their lives across the state due to rain and lightning. Chikkamagaluru has seen three such deaths, while five districts including Bengaluru have seen two deaths each.

Disaster Management officials said that they are prepared for instances of lightning and other rain-related incidents.
