Top news of the day: SC dismisses plea to review order on VVPAT counting, US to propose hike in H-1B application fee, and more

Here are the important news stories of the day

The Supreme Court on Tuesday dismissed a plea of 21 Opposition parties, led by Andhra Pradesh Chief Minister N. Chandrababu Naidu, to review its judgmentrejecting 50% random physical verification of Electronic Voting Machines (EVMs) using Voter-Verified Paper Audit Trail (VVPAT).

Prime Minister Narendra Modi has attempted to “malign and tarnish” the image of former Prime Minister Rajiv Gandhi, who was killed in a terror attack, the Congress told the Supreme Court on Tuesday.

Vibha Swaminathan of Mallya Aditi International School, Bengaluru and Dewang Kumar Agarwal of La Martiniere Boys, Kolkata have become the first students to score a perfect 100% in the Indian School Certificate (ISC) examinations.

Two Reuters journalists who were under detention in Myanmar for more than 500 days after their conviction of breaking the Official Secrets Act on May 7, 2019 walked free from a prison on the outskirts of Yangon, witnesses said.

The United States administration is proposing a hike in the H-1B visa application fee to increase funding for the expansion of apprentice programmes that train American youths in technology related activities, Labour Secretary Alexander Acosta told lawmakers.

Amidst heavy deployment of police, several women on Tuesday staged a protest outside the Supreme Court, demanding Chief Justice of India (CJI) Ranjan Gogoi’s resignation.

Senior Congress leader Suresh Pachouri on May 7 dumped loads of documents at former Madhya Pradesh Chief Minister Shivraj Singh Chouhan’s residence as a “proof” that his party has waived loans of 21 lakh farmers after coming to power in the State in December 2018.

In a funny reaction to the coffee cup goof up on the fourth episode of the final season of its fantasy series Game of Thrones, HBO said Daenerys Targaryen had ordered herbal tea, but was delivered a latte by mistake.

The road to the final has become difficult but Delhi Capitals have the means to drive their way through the obstacles, starting with the IPL eliminator against Sunrisers Hyderabad here on Wednesday.
