Congress taking pride in being a vote-splitter: PM Modi

Bharat tere tukde honge

NEW DELHI: In an exclusive interview to Navbharat Times, Prime Minister Narendra Modi mocked the claim by Congress chief Rahul Gandhi and his sister Priyanka that their party had fielded "weak" candidates in certain seats in UP to benefit SP-BSP nominees by cutting BJP votes. "Congress's position in these polls can be gauged from the fact that the party which once ruled the country, from panchayat to Parliament, is taking pride in being 'vote katwa' (vote splitter)," said Modi, adding that with the completion of every phase the despair of the opposition was only rising.Modi said it was clear after the completion of five rounds of polling that a "proincumbency wave" was in place. "BJP will get a clear majority in these elections as well. NDA's allies will also emerge victorious. NDA government with an absolute majority will be formed again," he said.The PM side-stepped a query when asked why he had praised Odisha chief minister Naveen Patnaik and why he was soft in his criticism of BSP chief Mayawati. Asking media to 'report news as it is', the Prime Minister said: "I support competitive cooperative federalism. State governments are important in a federal set-up and this is the reason I have been rooting for simultaneous Lok Sabha and assembly elections ". When asked about his remark during an election speech that SP was taking Mayawati for a ride by "keeping her in the dark", the Prime Minister said that his statement was meant for those who had a habit of using a political party for their benefit. "My focus is on how these games are played. Run an alliance with honesty. One shouldn't play games in an alliance."To a question whether in the last five years difference of opinions was being used to judge a person's nationalism or call one seditious, Modi said different thoughts only made a country strong. "But we will not tolerate those who say ''. Anyone who weakens the unity and integrity of the country will have to be punished," the PM said.
