Sushil Kumar Modi slams RJD for opposing 10% upper caste quota

BADKA GAON (GOPALGANJ): Deputy CM Sushil Kumar Modi played forward quota card in Brahmin-dominated Gopalganj reserved parliamentary constituency while campaigning for JD(U) candidate Dr Alok Kumar Suman on Tuesday.Addressing a public meeting here, the deputy CM appealed to the electors to ask the RJD candidate Surendra Ram Mahan why his party was opposing 10% quota for the poor in general category that the Narendra Modi-led NDA government at the Centre introduced recently.“When the V P Singh government introduced 27% reservation for backward and other backward classes in 1990, the BJP had supported the move. Now, RJD is saying that reservation would be abolished gradually, but one should not be swayed by their false propaganda. PM Narendra Modi also belongs to extremely backward community, who along with Nitish Kumar and LJP chief Ram Vilas Paswan will never allow abolition of reservation,” the deputy CM said.He also took a dig at incarcerated RJD chief Lalu Prasad, who was born in Phulwaria village in Gopalganj district. “This is the place from where people enjoyed Rajbhog (power) for 15 years and did nothing for the state and rather looted the revenue of state. They only had one mantra, ‘raaj paat japna, aur janta ka maal apna. The situation was such that former minister Raghunath Jha had to write his land for Lalu’s younger son Tejashwi Prasad Yadav to become minister. Bihar reeled under jungle raj (lawlessness) for 15 years during the regime of these people,” Modi said.The deputy CM also raised the issue of nationalism to garner support for the NDA. “Congress is accusing the BJP of making national security its poll agenda. They should know that development and employment generation would not be possible if the country is not safe. The opposition is questioning the PM for playing a role in the Balakot airstrikes. Can the Army act without the consent of the PM?” Modi asked.The deputy CM said the recent designation of JeM chief Masood Azhar as global terrorist was a huge victory of India under the leadership of PM Modi. “I believe a time will come when we will kill terrorists Hafiz Sayeed and Masood Azhar in Pakistan, like the USA killed Osama Bin Laden in Abbottabad town of Pakistan,” he said.Earlier, CM Nitish Kumar had also held a public meeting in Gopalganj’s Bhorey block on Sunday to seek votes for the candidate of his party.RLSP chief Upendra Kushwaha had addressed a rally at Bhorey on Monday to seek votes for RJD’s Surendra Ram. Polling in Gopalganj will be held in the sixth phase on May 12.
