Pune: Pune law student fears caste violence against lover, tells High Court her family has threatened to kill him

PUNE

Maratha

Tamil Nadu

At a time when an honour killing over an inter-caste marriage in the state has sent shockwaves across the country, yet another case has emerged of young lovers seeking protection at the doors of the Bombay High Court, terrified of being murdered by the girl’s family.The petition came to light a day after it was reported that a pregnant 19-year-old and her 23-year-old husband were set ablaze by the girl’s father and uncles in Ahmednagar. While Rukmini Raising and her unborn child succumbed to burn injuries.But even as their inter-caste marriage sparked this horrifying slaughter, 19-year-old Priyanka Shete — a student of law at the Modern Law College at Ganeshkhind in Pune— has approached the HC last week, claiming that her parents had caused her to fear for her life. As per her petition, her family objects to her relationship with a ‘lower caste’ college mate, who is also a resident of Pimpri-Chinchwad like her. His father is an assistant police sub inspector in the twin towns.Priyanka hails from an affluent business family of Umbare in Navlakh, and belongs to thecommunity. Pursuing the second year of her law degree, she has been in love with classmate Viraj Mohan Avaghade, a member of the Matang community, recognised as a scheduled caste.The petition before the HC states that Priyanka’s parents—Santosh Shete, 42, and Yogita Shete, 35 —never approved of Viraj’s caste. She claims they threatened to kill the couple on multiple occasions. On February 26, Priyanka even attempted to commit suicide by overdosing on pills. She was hospitalised and after her treatment, doctors referred the matter as a medico-legal case to Talegaon police station. The police recorded Priyanka’s statement, but she has alleged that they still shielded her parents from legal action over abetment of suicide. Finally, Priyanka was discharged from the medical facility on March 2.The travails of the couple, reads her petition, did not end there. The complainant narrated that her parents then summoned her uncle, Dattatray Bandu Shete (44), an advocate by profession. He allegedly possesses a handmade illegal firearm that was put to her head on March 22, while she was brutally assaulted and warned that Viraj would be shot dead if she fails to break up with him. By this point, her parents had also stopped sending her to college, affecting her academics.On April 27, Priyanka has said her parents took her to Pune railway station to be shunted off to. She managed to run away from the junction and call Viraj to come save her. Through their contacts within the legal circle, the couple approached the court. Shete said that though her boyfriend’s family is poor, she is much happier with them than her own kin.“We plan to get married as soon as we both attain majority of age,” Priyanka told Mirror in a short video. For now, she and Viraj have gone off the grid, and are assumed to have sought asylum at an undisclosed location in Mumbai.
