Girl moves HC, fearing caste violence against boyfriend, says her family has threatened to kill her lover

At a time when an honour killing over an inter-caste marriage in the state has sent shockwaves across the country, yet another case has emerged of young lovers seeking protection at the doors of the Bombay High Court, terrified of being murdered by the girl’s family.The petition came to light a day after it was reported that a pregnant 19-year-old and her 23-year-old husband were set ablaze by the girl’s father and uncles in Ahmednagar. While Rukmini Raising and her unborn child succumbed to burn injuries, Mangesh Raising was left battling for his life in a Pune hospital.But even as their inter-caste marriage sparked this horrifying slaughter, 19-yearold Priyanka Shete — a student at the Modern Law College at Ganeshkhind — has approached the HC last week, claiming that her parents had caused her to fear for her life.As per her petition, her family objects to her relationship with a ‘lower caste’ college mate, who is also a resident of Pimpri-Chinchwad like her. Interestingly, his father is an assistant police sub inspector in the twin towns.Priyanka hails from an affluent business family of Umbare in Navlakh, and belongs to the Maratha community. Pursuing the second year of her law degree, she has been in love with classmate Viraj Mohan Avaghade, a member of the Matang community, recognised as a scheduled caste (SC). Both were born in 2000, and say they would like to get married as soon as they turn 21 years old.The petition before the HC states that Priyanka’s parents — Santosh Shete (42) and Yogita Shete (35) — have never approved of Viraj’s caste. She claims they threatened to kill the couple on multiple occasions — such was the mental torture that on February 26 this year, Priyanka even attempted to commit suicide by overdosing on pills. She was admitted to Pavana Hospital where after her treatment, doctors referred the matter as a medico-legal case to Talegaon police station. Cops had recorded Priyanka’s statement — but she has alleged that they still shielded her parents from legal action over abetment of suicide. Finally, Priyanka was discharged from the medical facility on March 2.The travails of the couple, reads her petition, did not end there. The complainant narrated that her parents then summoned her uncle, Dattatray Bandu Shete (44), an advocate by profession. He allegedly possesses a handmade illegal firearm that was put to her head on March 22, while she was brutally assaulted and warned that Viraj would be shot dead if she fails to break up with him. By this point, her parents had also stopped sending her to college, which affected her academics.On April 27, Priyanka has said her parents took her to Pune railway station to be shunted off to Tamil Nadu. She managed to run away from the junction and call Viraj to come save her. Through their contacts within the legal circle, the couple approached the court. Shete said that though her boyfriend’s family is poor, she is much happier with them than her own kin.“I am a major and an educated girl — I am quite competent to take this decision in my life. I have decided to stay with my lover with the intention of getting married as soon as we both attain majority of age,” Priyanka told Mirrorin a short video. For now, she and Viraj have gone off the grid, and it is known that they had sought asylum at an undisclosed location in Mumbai.Priyanka had last month approached advocate Nitin Satpute, who sought protection for the couple. Satpute told Mirror, “On Tuesday, the HC directed the state to take care of the petitioner’s safety. She was also directed to approach the police. During the hearing, police stated that she has not approached them, although she had sent them a written complaint and emailed the same, too. The matter has been adjourned to May 21for afurther hearing.The lawyer added, “It is because the girl’s family is affluent and well connected that she has been finding it difficult to get the case registered in Pune district, despite the boy’s father being a policeman.”
