Will respond with silence: PM Modi on Priyanka Gandhi's 'Duryodhan' jibe at him - EXCLUSIVE

PM Narendra Modi spoke to Times Now's Megha Prasad on Wednesday | Photo Credit: Times Now

Kurukshetra: Prime Minister Narendra Modi on Wednesday justified his attack on former Prime Minister Rajiv Gandhi, which has earned him the opposition’s ire, and said that if Congress could “question the present Prime Minister”, why was he not allowed to question the ex-Prime Minister. Speaking to Times Now after his rally in Haryana’s Kurukshetra, PM Modi said that Congress chief Rahul Gandhi cannot simply “malign his image and get away.”

In an exclusive conversation with Times Now’s Megha Prasad, PM Modi said that he had called former PM Rajiv Gandhi “Bhrashtachari no.1” in response to Rahul’s statement in a magazine interview where he claimed that he would “rip apart” PM Modi’s “clean image.” PM Modi said, “Shouldn't Congress answer on Bofors scandal? Shouldn’t the party answer on Bhopal Gas Tragedy? Shouldn't Congress answer on 1984 riots?”

Prime Minister Modi also refused to comment on Congress general secretary Priyanka Gandhi’s recent jibe at him, in which she had equated him to the evil mythological character Duryodhan. Modi said that he would respond to the swipe “with silence.”

The Prime Minister also took a jibe at the Congress over its leader Shashi Tharoor praising Pakistan PM Imran Khan for hailing historical leader Tipu Sultan. “Congress accepts Pakistan PM, not Indian PM,” PM Modi quipped.

Expressing confidence in BJP’s victory in the 2019 elections, PM Modi predicted that NDA’s vote tally will increase as compared to the 2014 figures. “There is a pro-incumbency wave in the nation for the first time. The mood of the people is in favour of BJP,” Modi said.

He asserted that the BJP would win an “absolute majority” in the 2019 elections and would form the next government along with its NDA allies. “NDA will surpass its 2014 tally. Our vote share will also see an increase,” PM Modi said.

The Prime Minister also stated that national security and terrorism were the main issues in this general election and challenged the opposition to debate on developmental issues of the country.


