Supreme Court Closes Cases Of Inaction By EC Against PM Modi And Amit Shah

Guwahati: The Supreme Court today declined Congress's complaint against a string of clean chits handed out by the Election Commission to Prime Minister Narendra Modi and Bharatiya Janata Party (BJP) President Amit Shah.

A bench of Supreme Court led by Chief Justice of India Ranjan Gogoi said that they could not go into orders passed by the poll panel unless these were specifically challenged.

On April 29, Congress MP from Silchar, Assam Sushmita Dev approached the Supreme Court accusing the poll panel of inaction on complaints that PM Modi and Amit Shah had violated the model code of conduct. In the initial petition, the Silchar lawmaker had listed several complaints against the two leaders for their election speeches.

Congress MP Sushmita Dev requested the top court to direct the Election Commission of India to decide on complaints against the Prime Minister and Amit Shah within 24 hours.

Dev in her petition said that the PM Narendra Modi and BJP President have made "hate speeches" at campaign rallies adding that they also talked about the operations by the armed forces in public meeting despite the poll body's ban.

The opposition alleged that Modi had brazenly violated the poll code by invoking armed forces repeatedly during his poll rallies and demanded that a campaign ban be imposed on him for some time.

And as the top court got into the picture, the election commission fast-tracked the complaints that had been pending for weeks. The court also set a deadline on May 2 for the election commission to clear the backlog of complaints against the PM.

Refusing the petition that had been filed against the delayed action by the panel, CJI Gogoi said that they don't see how they can go into the orders of the EC unless a specific challenge is made.

Dev, in her new affidavit also cited a complaint filed with the EC on May 6 after PM Modi reportedly made unprecedented, obscene and derogatory remarks in a speech against former Prime Minister Rajiv Gandhi.

Also Read: NATIONAL NEWS
