These are the adorable baby animals born at Chester Zoo in 2018

Something went wrong, please try again later.

Sign up for our daily newsletter to get the day's biggest stories sent direct to your inbox

If you thought the birth of a new Royal baby in 2018 was great, wait until you see these new babies who made their debut.

The staff at Chester Zoo welcomed some rather cute new faces during the year, from the UK’s first ever sun bear cub to the hatching of one of the world’s least understood reptile species.

The additions to the Cheshire-based zoo made for an unprecedented number of births in 2018.

Wildlife experts at the attraction have put their ongoing success down to an array of factors including providing naturalistic habitats, their expert staff, the highest levels of animal welfare and the very latest scientific knowledge of highly threatened species.

Get ready to 'aww' and 'ooo' over our favourite 10 baby animals to be born at Chester Zoo in 2018.

1. Sun bear Kyra

(Image: Chester Zoo)

The first of her kind ever to be born in the UK, little sun bear cub Kyra tops the list.

And despite her young age, she became an Internet sensation after her birth was caught on the zoo's CCTV cameras and the immediate first moments with her mum.

Kyra is particularly important given the remarkable survival story of her parents, Milli and Toni, who were both rescued from poachers in Cambodia.

Snatched from the wild as young bears by illegal wildlife traders, the pair were kept as mistreated pets after seeing their own parents killed in the process.

They were ultimately found in a very poor condition but were lovingly nursed back to health by conservationists working for the Free The Bears organisation in Cambodia.

The duo were then moved to the UK and eventually arrived at Chester Zoo’s purpose built new habitat to complete their recovery.

And the birth of Kyra was the icing on the cake of a remarkable story.



Conservationists believe that fewer than 1,000 sun bears remain in the wild across South East Asia as a result of deforestation and commercial hunting.

2. Stevie the chimpanzee

Born to mum ZeeZee, Stevie was another first of her kind to be born at the zoo for nearly 10 years.

West African chimpanzees are critically endangered and it is estimated that as few as 18,000 now remain in the wild.

(Image: Chester Zoo)

Can you guess who Stevie was named after?

Keepers at the zoo have a longstanding tradition of naming new-born chimpanzees after musical legends so Stevie was chosen in honour of Fleetwood Mac frontwoman Stevie Nicks.

Others include Dylan (Bob), Eric (Clapton), Tina (Turner) and Carlos (Santana).

3. Elephant calf Anjan

Anjan's arrival was a long time coming as it is believed his mother, Thi Hi Way's, pregnancy lasted 25 months.

But following a healthy arrival, Asian elephant Anjan has become an invaluable addition the breeding programme for the endangered elephants.

(Image: Chester Zoo)

Zoo conservationists have been operating in India for 14 years, preventing extinction of Asian elephants in the wild by utilising the skills and knowledge developed working with the herd in Chester.

A major Chester Zoo project in Assam, northern India, has successfully found ways to eliminate conflict between local communities and the nearby Asian elephant population, offering a blueprint for the future conservation of the species.

4. Greater one-horned rhino Akeno

Another to be captured on camera at the zoo was the momentous birth of greater one-horned rhino calf Akeno.

Mum Asha was in labour for just 20 minutes after a 16-month-long pregnancy.

(Image: Chester Zoo)

The greater one-horn rhino was once hunted almost to extinction and less than 200 survived in the wild.

But now, following steps to protect the striking animal, there are around 3,500 in India and Nepal.

Looking at the bigger picture, that number is still desperately small and they continue to face threats to their long-term survival, including poaching for their horns and conflict with humans on the land where they once roamed freely.

5. Semuliki the okapi

The rare and elusive okapi calf Semuliki also arrived at Chester Zoo last year.

Born to first-time parents K’tusha and Stomp, the male calf shares his name with a major national park and river that runs through the Democratic Republic of Congo (DRC), Uganda and East Africa.

(Image: Chester Zoo)

The okapi is known for being a secretive animal, only first being discovered in 1901, and is only found deep in the forests of the DRC.

Populations have declined in the wild by nearly 50% over the past two decades and the species is now listed as endangered on the International Union for the Conservation of Nature’s (IUCN).

The zoo hopes that new calf Semuliki with help boost awareness of the little-known species and their plight in the wild.

6. Tiny forest dragons

A clutch of rare baby ‘forest dragons’ hatched at the zoo in 2018, helping conservationists to uncover more about one of the world’s least understood reptile species.

(Image: Chester Zoo)

Also known as the Borneo forest dragon, the lizards are found in parts of South East Asia but reptile experts at the zoo say little was otherwise known about the mysterious creatures, with reliable information being incredibly scarce.

But sadly their wild habitat is being completely decimated to make way for palm oil plantations.

7. Rare silvery gibbon

The amazing addition of a tiny silvery gibbon captured visitors attention after mum Tilu showed off her newborn just minutes after its birth.

There are just 4,000 of its kind now remaining on the island of Java, Indonesia, where the species is now listed as endangered by the IUCN so conservationist were more than pleased with the arrival.

(Image: Chester Zoo)

Though the little silvery gibbon is hairless with a pink face now, over the coming months the baby will develop its iconic silver fur.

8. Pink flamingo chicks

Not just one, but 21 fluffy pink flamingo chicks made their entrance at the zoo.

Following their arrival, each one was carefully hand fed by Chester Zoo's team of bird experts four times a day for five weeks until they were developed enough to feed for themselves.

(Image: Chester Zoo)

The cute youngsters didn't stay at the zoo but moved to another to help form a brand new colony as part of a breeding programme for the distinctive birds.

It will take around six months for the flamingo chicks to develop their iconic pink feathers.

9. Tiny babirusa triplets

Three of the world's rarest pigs were born to mum Kendaria after a six month pregnancy.

It also marked the first time that a set of babirusa triplets have been born at the zoo and it is somewhat of a phenomenon as it only happens in around four percent of babirusa births.

(Image: Chester Zoo)

Once considered fairly common, the rapid decline comes as result of hunting for their meat and habitat loss, which has seem them disappear from many parts of the island of Sulawesi, Indonesia.

10. Jumaane the Eastern black rhino

Incredibly rare, the arrival of Jumaane came as a bit of a shock to Chester Zoo visitors - because the birth took place right in front of them.

It is typical of a rhino birth to happen at night or in the early hours of the morning but not this time.

(Image: Chester Zoo)

The calf's 12-year-old mum Malindi went into labour at noon and Jumaane was delivered less than 30 minutes later.

Conservationists now estimate that fewer than 650 Eastern black rhino remain across Africa which is believed to have been driven by an increase in poaching to meet the demand for rhino horn.
