Deoband ulemas want Agnivesh to apologise for 'scary' burqa remark

MUZAFFARNAGAR: Swami Agnivesh ’s remark that “women in burqa look like some other scary creature and the sight is frightening” did not go down well with the Muslim scholars and ulemas in Uttar Pradesh ’s Deoband.Deoband-based ulemas have now hit back at Swami Agnivesh for making the controversial statement and asked him to tender an apology for “hurting the sentiments of the minority community”.The noted scholar’s recent burqa comment came during his campaign for Congress party in Madhya Pradesh. “Women in burqa look like some other scary creature and the sight is frightening. The entire world must ban the burqa,” Swami Agnivesh had said.Muslim ulemas in Deoband have slammed Swami Agnivesh and strongly condemned the statement. Qari Ishaq Gora, a Muslim scholar, said: “Nowadays, politics is being played on burqa across the country. This is against democracy and our fundamental right. Some people drag religious subjects into controversy for their own political gains.”“The election commission should take cognizance against people like Swami Agnivesh and [BJP leader] Sangeet Som, and strong action should be taken for their publicly incorrect remarks,” the scholar added.Another Deoband-based cleric, Mufti Asad Qasmi, said that Swami Agnivesh stands exposed with his “poisonous” talk. “Swami [Agnivesh] has proved that he is a BJP-RSS man. We want to tell him that we had a good image of you in our mind. But, with your toxic words we now came to know that you are also like RSS and BJP,” said Mufti Asad Qasmi.Warning against any kind of burqa ban, Mufti Asad Qasmi said, “We will not tolerate this kind of demand. If Swami Agnivesh does not make an apology for his remark, we will go against him.”Notably, a few days ago, Deoband ulemas gave a strong response to reports of Sri Lanka considering a ban on burqa. The Island nation was recently hit by a series of deadly terror attacks.“Banning burqa is a direct attack against the religious beliefs of a particular community. Terrorists have no religion. We condemn the ghastly attacks [in Sri Lanka] but at the same time an entire community should not be persecuted,” said Mufti Arshad Farooqi, who runs an independent online fatwa service in Deoband.
