Chhattisgarh seeks 5 wild buffaloes from Assam to revive bovine count

GUWAHATI: Chhattisgarh has sought at least five female wild buffaloes from Assam to help revive the bovine population in the central Indian state that has seen a drastic fall in the number of species in the last few years. The state forest department is working on a protocol for the translocation because this would be the first time wild buffaloes would be shifted from Assam to another state.The wild buffalo is the state animal of Chhattisgarh and the Udanti-Sitanadi Tiger Reserve now has only eight wild buffaloes, including one female buffalo. Experts felt destruction of habitats and inter-breeding with domestic buffaloes could be among the reasons leading to the decline in the number of this animal.The Wildlife Trust of India (WTI), which is helping the Chhattisgarh forest department increase the number of the species, estimated that the state is left with about 50 wild buffaloes in the protected areas. Chhattisgarh chief wildlife warden Rakesh Chaturvedi told TOI the translocation plan for the buffaloes has been approved by the Central Zoo Authority. "The plan is to shift five wild buffaloes from the Manas National Park in Assam. Our team is going to Manas soon to work out the details," Chaturvedi said.He added that translocation is the only way the animal count can be increased in Chhattisgarh. "The wild buffalo population is more or less satisfactory in the Indravati Tiger Reserve in Dantewada in Chhattisgarh, but because of Left wing extremism, it is difficult to enter and make a proper assessment," Chaturvedi said. He added that the priority right now is to revive the population in the Udanti-Sitanadi Tiger Reserve.A senior Assam forest official said they are working on the proposal of the Chhattisgarh government. "As of now we can only say that the proposal is in the initial stage," the official said.Sources in the Assam forest department said the translocation plan was scheduled for January and March this year, but in the absence of a 'protocol' on translocation, the plan could not be executed. "We have not translocated wild buffaloes in the past, and so we do not have a protocol for it. We need to consult wildlife experts and scientists and it's a time-consuming exercise," the official said.Wild buffalo translocation is fraught with challenges. "We don't know exactly how the animal will react when we tranquillize it. The dose for tranquillization also needs to be ascertained. Above all, the distance factor (about 1,500 km) has also to be taken into account," an expert said.Globally, there are roughly 4,000 wild buffaloes with Assam alone being home to 3,000, mostly at the Kaziranga National Park and the Manas National Park. The wild buffalo is listed in Schedule I of the Indian Wild Life (Protection) Act, 1972 and classified as endangered in the IUCN (International Union for Conservation of Nature) Red List of Threatened Species.
