WHO issues warning as measles infects 34,000 in Europe: Know the symptoms of this highly contagious disease

WHO issues warning as measles infects 34,000 in Europe: Know the symptoms of this highly contagious disease | Photo Credit: Thinkstock

New Delhi: The World Health Organisation (WHO) urged authorities that vulnerable people get vaccinated against measles as the highly contagious disease affects more than 34,000 people across Europe in the first two months of 2019. The vast majority of cases are reported from Ukraine, which is dealing with a measles epidemic and witnessed more than 25,000 people infected in the first two months of the year.

Of the 34,300 measles cases, the disease has claimed at least 13 lives in Ukraine, Romania and Albania. Since measles is a very contagious illness, WHO warned that outbreaks may continue to spread. Despite the availability of a safe and effective vaccine, worldwide, measles remains a major cause of death among young children.

“If outbreak response is not timely and comprehensive, the virus will find its way into more pockets of vulnerable individuals and potentially spread to additional countries within and beyond the region,” WHO said in a statement. “Every opportunity should be used to vaccinate susceptible children, adolescents and adults,” it added.

What are the signs and symptom of measles?

The symptoms of measles generally develop about 7-14 days after a person is infected, and may include the following:

High fever Cough Runny nose Sore, red eyes that may be sensitive to light Small, greyish-white spots on the inside of the cheeks

A few days later, a red-brown blotchy rash will appear on the face at the hairline before spreading downward to the neck, trunk, arms, legs, and feet.

Seek immediate medical help if you suspect that you or anyone in your family may have measles. In fact, you should talk to your doctor if you have been in close contact with someone who has measles and haven’t - been fully vaccinated or had the infection before, even if you do not have any symptoms.

Measles is highly contagious and can be transmitted to others via droplets from the nose, mouth or throat of an infected person while coughing and sneezing. According to the CDC, infected persons can spread the virus to others from four days before through four days after the rash appears.

How can you prevent measles?

You can prevent measles by having the measles, mumps and rubella (MMR) vaccine, which is administered in two doses. Since there is no specific treatment for measles, it’s always better to prevent it from getting the infection than it is to deal with the disease after it has happened.
