IFFCO gets ready to elect new Board along with Chairman and Vice Chairman

The die is cast and the D-day has come. IFFCO gets ready to elect new Board today. Besides the five seats where voting would take place, the election of Chairman and Vice Chairman would also take place today at IFFCO headquarters in Saket in Delhi.

The Chief Election Officer Tarun Bhargava said the election process will start soon after the conclusion of IFFCO’s 48th Annual General Meeting. The AGM will start at 9:00 A.M. and end by 10:00 A.M. And thereafter the election of the board of directors will begin. The result will be announced today only.

From State Co-op Federations, eight Directors were elected unopposed as was clear from the final list pasted at IFFCO notice board after withdrawal of candidates on Thursday evening.

While six of them are from the outgoing board, there are two new entries this time. They are Swati Meena Nayak from Madhya Pradesh State Cooperative Marketing Federation and Amarjeet Singh from Punjab State Cooperative Marketing Federation.

The other Directors from Federations who had rather smooth sailing are Dileepbhai Saghani from Gujarat State Cooperative Marketing Federation, Aditya Yadav from UP Cooperative Federation, MN Rajendra Kumar from Karnataka State Cooperative Marketing Federation, Kanchi Rama Rao from Andhra Pradesh State Cooperative Marketing Federation, Dr M.V.Rao from West Bengal State Cooperative Marketing Federation, and Abhay Kumar from Rajasthan State Cooperative Marketing Federation.

The voting would be restricted to co-op societies, said Sanghani to this correspondent. While a few from Maharashtra withdrew their nomination on Thursday, the polling would take place in the five constituencies as predicted earlier in these columns.

Five candidates out of eight from Maharashtra-Andhra Pradesh-Telangana-Goa have withdrawn their nomination papers. They are Ashok Jagtap, B.K.Patil, Sanjay Pawar, Rajendra Deoraji Kannamwar and the outgoing director from Andhra Pradesh Praveen Reddy.

Now, from Maharashtra-Andhra Pradesh-Telangana-Goa, there are three candidates left in the fray including Vivek Bipindada Kole and Advay Prashant Hire from Maharashtra and Devendra Reddy from Telengana.

There will be an intense fight for the Haryana-Delhi seat between the outgoing director and former minister Prahalad Singh and Sunil Khatri. Simachal Padhy and Chandra Kumar Purohit are clashing for the Odisha -West Bengal seat.

From Madhya Pradesh-Chhattisgarh seat, Manju Singh Deo and Amit Pratap Singh are in the fray.

Sadhana Jadhav and Dr Varsha Kasturkar are slugging it out for the women constituency.
