Security officials posted at Pune railway station given body cameras to reinforce effective policing

As many as 25 cameras will be handed out, said an official (Representative Image) | Photo Credit: BCCL

Pune: In a welcome move, security officials posted at the Pune railway station in Maharashtra will now wear body cameras while performing their duties. The initiative has been taken to heighten safety measures and ensure that security standards are met by deployed personnel. A senior official claims that this move will allow authorities to make the railway station a beggar and hawker-free zone in addition to reducing instances of crime.

Security men posted at Pune railway station get body cameras by the railway security headquarters to Pune division railway police force (RPF) personnel for this purpose. The initiative was implemented after it was cleared by the top brass of the RPF and government railway police (GRP) along with the divisional railway manager's officer.

The cameras which will be given to security personnel have the capacity to record for eight hours at a stretch, additional security officer BK Makrariya told Hindustan Times. He added that the personnel will be expected to examine the recording at the end of every day in order to initiate action against offenders. Another official added that all concerned departments have been making extensive efforts to bring down the crime rate at the Pune railway station for the past year. He added that with this initiative, Pune railway station could be beggar and hawker-free zone.

Reports have also asserted that the Pune railway station is hunting ground for pick-pocketers and mobile thieves. As many as 500 cases of theft have been reported from the railway station in recent months and authorities believe that the body camera initiative will allow them to identify and trace offenders better and ensure ideal policing. In 2018, Kerala Police personnel were given 25 state of the art body cameras in order to reinforce effective policing. Similar initiatives have been taken by police departments in Chennai, Goa and the national capital.
