Cyclone Fani: here’s how you can help rebuild Odisha

In the aftermath of Cyclone Fani, one of the worst cyclones to hit India’s eastern coastline, Odisha has proved that it is one of the most disaster-ready states in the world. After more than a million people were evacuated into 9,000 shelters within 24 hours, the state is presently preparing to rebuild itself.

Relief and restoration work are underway to provide vital facilities like water supply, electricity, and mobile connectivity.

Cyclone Fani was the strongest tropical cyclone to strike the Indian state of Odisha. Image credit: World Vision

Several citizens and organisations have come forward to help the state get back to normalcy. While food tech startup Zomato has teamed up with Feeding India, a not-for-profit organisation, to deliver meals and basic amenities to the affected families, entities such as Kalinga Swaraj Foundation has pitched for contribution to the Odisha Chief Minister Relief Fund on crowdsourcing platform Milaap.

Also read: In the wake of Cyclone Fani, Odisha emerges a role model in disaster preparedness

Here’s how you can help.

1. Chief Minister’s Relief Fund

Chief Minister's Relief Fund

You can donate online directly to the Odisha Chief Minister’s Relief Fund. There is the option to write a cheque or a bank draft in favour of “Chief Minister’s Relief Fund, Odisha”, payable at Bhubaneswar, with the following mailing address:

Additional Secretary to Government

Chief Minister’s Relief Fund

General Administration & Public Grievance Department

Odisha Secretariat, Bhubaneswar-751001

2. Amazon

Ecommerce major Amazon has initiated a donation drive on its platform to rehabilitate the livelihoods of disaster-hit families. You can make a contribution by scanning the QR code using your Amazon app or make an UPI payment here.

3. Zomato

Victims of Cyclone Fani being served food by the Feeding India volunteers

Foodtech unicorn Zomato has collaborated with Feeding India and announced a relief drive to provide succour for victims in the cyclone-affected area and pave the way for public participation. You can contribute to food relief directly through the Zomato platform, or sign up to be a volunteer to provide assistance on ground or even drop off essential items like utensils and clothing here.

4. Habitat for Humanity

Habitat for Humanity is assisting the rehabilitation operations in Odisha

Habitat for Humanity India, a non-profit organisation, has deputed its Rapid Response Team and mobilised volunteers to assist in recovery operations and rebuilding the lives of families affected by Cyclone Fani. In the first phase of the response, Habitat India is reaching out to affected individuals and families with humanitarian aid kits and emergency shelter kits. You can donate here.

Stay Updated Get news and updates from the world of social entrepreneurship Please fill in this field. {{#error}} {{error}} {{/error}} {{^error}} Something went wrong. Try again later {{/error}} Welcome Onboard ! You have been successfully registered for our daily newsletter.

5. Paytm

Fintech major Paytm has opened up contributions on its digital payments app to enable users to contribute to relief and rehabilitation efforts in Odisha. Users have the option to contribute to the Odisha Cyclone Relief Fund on the Paytm app.

6. SEEDS India

SEEDS India is reaching out to 100,000 people in the most affected regions with safe drinking water, hygiene kits, and medical camps. The not-for-profit organisation is providing safe drinking water to affected families through local water treatment and organising health camps to provide urgent medical attention to the victims of Cyclone Fani.

To make a contribution, visit this.

#Cyclone Fani is continuing its path across Eastern India, but communities are already suffering from the impact. SEEDS is responding to help the most vulnerable families with immediate #water and #healthneeds

7. SOS Children’s Villages of India

SOS Children’s Villages of India has set up two relief camps, reaching out to 1,000 affected families who are most vulnerable, with safe childcare spaces for children being created in these relief camps.

Make a donation online here.

8. ActionAid Association

ActionAid Association has its emergency response teams on the ground, who are ready to do an early assessment and find out needs of impacted populations. ActionAid teams, which are closely monitoring the situation in Odisha and West Bengal, have been working with the state government and other institutions, supporting the evacuation of locals and spreading early warning measures with the local community radio.

To donate to ActionAid’s Cyclone Fani relief fund, go here.

9. Goonj

Non-governmental organisation Goonj is accepting monetary contributions as well as materials including food, utensils, clothes, toiletries, essentials, and other items. To make a contribution, visit this page.

10. Ketto

Crowdfunding platform Ketto is helping raise funds for the affected families

Disaster relief NGO Rapid Response has asked for Rs 10,00,000 on the crowdfunding website Ketto, to distribute 1,000 relief kits to 1,000 worst affected families. Make your contribution online here.

11. Milaap

Milaap is aiming to raise a total of Rs 1 crore for the victims

Organised by the Kalinga Swaraj Foundation, the campaign is aiming to raise a total of Rs 1 crore, of which over Rs 11.6 lakh has already been received. You can make a donation by clicking here.

12. Oxfam India

Oxfam has thrown open its platform for monetary contributions from people

NGO Oxfam India is looking out for monetary donations, which will go towards water, emergency food supplies, shelter and hygiene kits, rehabilitation, and long-term recovery. To donate, go here.

13. HelpAge India

HelpAge is providing relief intervention for those affected in Cyclone Fani

The NGO has created a portal and is accepting monetary donations to rebuild the lives of those affected by the cyclone. The organisation will use the money for rations, medical supplies, and other relief materials.

To make a contribution, click here.

14. World Vision

The international disaster management agency has opened a relief fund donations page for India and Bangladesh. The agency will release the funds to their local partners doing relief work. Make a donation online here.

15. DonateKart

This website has listed a few essential items such as rice, water, wheat, and sanitary napkins among others that people can choose from and donate. You can buy items for relief by clicking here.

16. UNICEF USA

UNICEF is welcoming donations for children’s healthcare and nutrition in Odisha

UNICEF is asking for donations towards children’s healthcare, nutrition, safe drinking water and protection. It accepts donations in US dollars. You can make a contribution here.

17. ImpactGuru

Crowdsourcing platform ImpactGuru has put up a fundraiser, the contributions of which will be deviated towards The Chief Minister Public Relief Fund. To make a donation, visit this.

Bengaluru-based Aahwahan Foundation has also pitched for funds on the ImpactGuru platform. The volunteers of the NGO have already started distributing food and water to the affected families. Make your contribution here.

Also read: UK-based Khalsa Aid brings hot food and clean water to people in Odisha reeling from Cyclone Fani
