BJP, PM indulging in caste politics: Akhilesh Yadav vows to oust government that’s ‘formed on hatred’

Samajwadi Party chief Akhilesh Yadav. | Photo Credit: ANI

Lucknow: Samajwadi Party supremo and former Uttar Pradesh chief minister Akhilesh Yadav on Saturday claimed that the Bharatiya Janata Party and the Congress were spreading rumours to incite workers of SP and Mayawati’s Bahujan Samaj Party, with whom Akhilesh’s party has formed a coalition (mahagathbandhan) for the 2019 Lok Sabha elections.

He accused the BJP and Prime Minister Narendra Modi of indulging in caste politics and spreading hatred among different castes and religions.

“The PM and BJP blame others for things they do or want to do. The BJP is doing caste-based politics and spreading hatred among people from different castes and religions. The foundation of their government is based on lies and hatred. The gathbandhan has decided to demolish the government which was formed on hatred,” he said at a campaign rally, news agency ANI reported.

SP chief Akhilesh Yadav: In the 6th phase of elections, BJP and Congress will win zero seats. In the 7th phase they might win a few seats, BJP will win only 1 seat in that phase. https://t.co/MAMk0vpTU4 — ANI UP (@ANINewsUP) May 11, 2019

The SP chief also claimed that the BJP and the Congress won’t win any seats in the sixth phase, that is set to take place on Sunday, May 12. “In the sixth phase, the BJP and Congress will not win any seat. In the seventh phase, they (Congress) might win a few, but the BJP will win only 1.”

His tirade against the BJP continued as he alleged that the party has instructed officers to issue ‘red cards’ to SP workers so that they are unable to vote.

Akhilesh Yadav, SP: Will Red Cards be issued to SP-BSP only? Is everyone in BJP clean, is there no one there with criminal background who was issued Red Card? BJP is conspiring to scare people so that they don't cast their votes. https://t.co/abvR3187lf — ANI UP (@ANINewsUP) May 11, 2019

“SP-BSP workers are being issued red cards and are being prevented from casting their votes. We had complained to the Election Commission last time this happened,” he said, asking whether 'Red Cards will be issued to SP-BSP only. “Is everyone in the BJP clean, is there no one there with criminal background who was issued Red Card? The BJP is conspiring to scare people so that they don't cast their votes.”

Elections in Uttar Pradesh are being held in all seven phases. The counting of votes will be done on May 23.
