Will the issue of unemployment prove to be an underdog in ensuring NDA’s defeat in 2019 elections or not?

Dr Abhishek Singhvi is a third term senior MP, eminent jurist and national spokesperson of the Congress party. He is also a senior advocate in the Supreme Court; former additional solicitor general (ASG) of India; former Vice President, Supreme Court Bar Association (SCBA) as well as former Vice-Chairman, Media Department of Congress. Dr Singhvi has written regular columns in several newspapers and portals such as the Times of India, Hindustan Times, Pioneer & indya.com. Two of his collections have been published as books, namely "Candid Corner" & "Straight Talk". LESS ... MORE

With a manifesto claiming for encouraging and empowering youth via self-employment, Bharatiya Janata Party (BJP) came into power in 2014. Speaking at a meeting of the BJP just months before the 2014 polls, Narendra Modi denounced the lack of work for India’s youth population: “The country has such immense youth capital, but it is yearning for employment, what kind of situation is this…!” Modi promised to ensure that, with growth, there would also be jobs for the youth. He had promised that his government would create 2 crore jobs every year.

However, experts say that the situation has only gotten worse: New figures from the independent researchers at the Centre for Monitoring Indian Economy (CMIE) show that joblessness is rising.

The CMIE estimated that 11 million jobs were lost in 2018 – pushing the unemployment rate to 7.38%. This was witnessed as one of the many after-effects of demonetisation of high-value notes in late 2016 and the chaotic launch of a new Goods and Services Tax in 2017, hitting millions of small businesses.

More importantly, it must be noted that India’s already low labour participation rate, by world standards, further fell sharply after demonetisation. During January-October 2016, the average labour participation rate was 47% in contrast to the world average of 66%. This labour participation rate fell to 45% immediately after demonetisation in November 2016 since 2% of the working-age population moved out of labour markets. The major brunt of demonetisation was borne by women. Their labour participation fell drastically. Therefore, while the decline in employment had already emerged in 2015, it became pronounced after demonetisation in 2016.

After the shock of demonetisation came the blow of Goods and Services Tax in July 2017. GST drove away small enterprises which could not compete in a tax-compliant environment out of business, which further caused a substantial loss of jobs. Hence leading to the extreme reduction in jobs availability in 2018 which in turn leads to a higher level of unemployment amongst the Indian youth.

Craig Jeffrey, the author of several books on Indian youth unemployment, claims that recent sociological accounts of unemployed youth highlight three points that numbers alone cannot capture. Firstly, they call attention to the powerful sense of anxiety and social suffering associated with unemployment. Unemployment and underemployment are often compounded by a sense of being out of time or of being unable to participate in ‘adulthood’. Secondly, it is highlighted through numerous quantitative studies that the jobs crisis is not simply about employment but further it is fundamentally bound up in surrounding social conditions. In many northern states, in particular, poor-quality education, inadequate road infrastructure, weak health services, and widespread bureaucratic malpractice seriously impede young people’s attempts to escape unemployment, and this is frequent in the case of ‘lower’ castes, women and those from more remote, rural areas. Lastly, many young people in the 2010s encounter difficulties in expressing political ideas. This point is substantiated by emerging reports on the social lives of India’s unemployed youth. During the 2000s, when Jeffrey carried out intensive research in Uttar Pradesh, youth were using student politics and public mobilisation to voice demands. But in recent times multiple channels for protest and action have been closed owing to the present government’s attempts to police university campus politics as well as a more general decline in opportunities for civic activism.

A leaked National Sample Survey Office report pegged the unemployment rate, which was never above 2.6% between 1977 and 2012, at 6.1% in 2018, the highest in over four decades. Business Standard reported that unemployment is at a “45-year-high”. The government first tried to prevent these numbers from becoming public, when this failed, they challenged their accuracy. Union minister Arun Jaitley asserted:

“If the economy is growing at 12% nominal growth for the last five years, it would be an economic absurdity to say that such a large economic growth, the highest in the world, doesn’t lead to the creation of jobs… If no job creation takes place then there is social unrest. This has been a peace period where no major social agitation has been witnessed in the last five years.”

In a different interpretation of employment, both PM Modi and Amit Shah reiterated that even selling ‘pakodas’ is also a kind of employment. In January 2018, they stated that street food vendors (selling pakodas) should also be considered in employment statistics and hence unemployment in the country is actually much lower than statistically reported. This added to the woes of the unemployed youth which led to ‘Pakodanomics’. Pakodanomics was used as a light-hearted reference to the economic policies of the government. Congress president Rahul Gandhi has been a vocal critic of the BJP government’s performance on the employment front. While campaigning in Karnataka recently, he quoted PM Modi as saying that the BJP government would give employment to 2 crore youths every year. Further, he pointed out that, China gives employment to 50,000 youth in 24 hours whereas Modi government gives employment to only 450 people in 24 hours.

All the more, finance minister Piyush Goyal chose to remain silent on the issue of job creation while presenting the budget for the financial year 2019-20. In fact, he uttered jobs only on five occasions in the 90-minute monologue without giving any number on how many jobs have been created in the last five years of Modi government or a promise of a similar kind for the future.

Unemployment as an issue has been constantly avoided by BJP after making promises regarding the same. If this issue is paid adequate attention, it can play a major role in challenging BJP. The working age group 15-59 years account for 62.5% of India’s population. Such demographic dividend in India highlights the need and urgency to addressing employment-related issues of this section of the population. This window of opportunity with regard to the demographic dividend of India is open only till 2030. Hence, the same holds tremendous influence in the 2019 general elections. Looking at the intensity of the unrest of the unemployed youth, I believe that the issue will certainly prove to be the final nail in the coffin of the NDA Government.

Facebook Twitter Linkedin Email Disclaimer Views expressed above are the author's own.
