Here is the latest news from The Associated Press at 11:40 p.m. EDT

Estimated read time: 2-3 minutes

This archived news story is available only for your personal, non-commercial use. Information in the story may be outdated or superseded by additional information. Reading or replaying the story in its archived form does not constitute a republication of the story.

MANILA, Philippines (AP) — Philippine President Rodrigo Duterte's name is not on the ballot but Monday's midterm elections are seen as a crucial referendum on his rise to power with a brutal crackdown on illegal drugs, unorthodox style and contentious embrace of China. Opposition aspirants consider the Senate the last bastion of checks and balances given the solid dominance of Duterte's loyalists in the lower house. An independent survey shows Duterte-backed candidates winning the race with only one from the opposition.

CARACAS, Venezuela (AP) — In one of his strongest public pleas yet for greater U.S. involvement in Venezuela's fast-escalating crisis, opposition leader Juan Guaidó says he's instructed his political envoy in Washington to immediately open relations with the U.S. military. Guaidó said Saturday that he's asked his ambassador Carlos Vecchio to open "direct communications" toward possible coordination. U.S.-backed Guaidó is leading a campaign to oust President Nicolás Maduro.

UNDATED (AP) — Abortion rights supporters are worried about a trend that has seen many state governments in the Deep South and Midwest recently pass laws that would virtually eliminate abortion access. Although the bans could be held up in court for years, a more conservative U.S. Supreme Court has emboldened states to adopt the measures. Alabama lawmakers are expected next week to resume debating a proposal that would make performing nearly all abortions a felony.

HOUSTON (AP) — Houston police say they found "blood evidence" in the apartment of Derion Vence that matches that of the missing 4-year-old girl, Maleah Davis. In a statement on the arrest of Vence, Houston police say that he has been charged with tampering with evidence.

NEW DELHI (AP) — Indians are voting in the next-to-last round of 6-week-long national elections, marked by a highly acrimonious campaign with Prime Minister Narendra Modi flaying the opposition Congress party rival Rahul Gandhi for the country's ills. Sunday's voting in 59 constituencies, including seven in the Indian capital, will complete polling for 483 of 543 seats in the lower house of Parliament. Turnout in the first five phases averaged 67%, nearly the same as in 2014 elections that brought Modi to power.

Copyright © The Associated Press. All rights reserved. This material may not be published, broadcast, rewritten or redistributed.

×

Tags World
