Tourists at Lonavala hit over fare of camel rides

Family had come down from Vadodara for Sankranti holidays; miscreants took money and jewellery to leave them alone



A 25-member family from Gujarat ,including children and women, was brutally assaulted on Monday evening over a dispute on charges for camel rides at Tiger point in Lonavala. Three members of the family suffered head injuries and were sent to a private hospital for treatment.



Four locals were arrested after a complaint was filed by Ibad Abdulsathar Memon, 52, one of the elders in the group. The victims, who originally hail from Vadodara, had come to visit the hill station for Sankranti holidays.



The accused have been identified as Tanaji Shivaji Rajivade, 20, Chandrakant Yeshwant Takave, 19, Vishwas Yeshwant Takave, 42, Rajesh Badri Jadhav, 23, all residents of Aatvan village near Pavana Lake, said senior police inspector Ramdas Ingawale of Lonavala rural.



They have been booked under Indian Penal Code (IPC) sections 395 for dacoity, 326 for grievous hurt with weapons and 504 for intentional insult to provoke breach of peace.



At around 5.45 pm, the children in the group took camel rides at Tiger point, a popular tourist spot in Lonavala. The elders were told that they will be charged Rs 150 for the ride but later on they were demanded Rs 250.



When they declined to pay the amount, a verbal exchange happened between Abdul Razak Motiwala, 29, and the local businessmen after which he was beaten up. Seeing this, his brothers Aasim Moitwala, 29 and Sufiyan, 23 intervened. The family then assembled together but they were outnumbered by the local traders and miscreants.



“Around 40 people had assembled from nowhere which also included women. Razak was separated and made to sit and beaten up until he lost consciousness. My family was beaten up with metal pipes and they broke beer bottles on their head,” said Sufiyan, one of the victims said while screaming with pain as a doctor examined him for injuries.



A woman carrying a three-month-old ran to their car for cover as she was chased with man carrying a boulder. Ibad Memon then offered to pay the miscreants to leave his family alone.



“The women had to beg before them to let go some of the men who were unconscious,” Memon said .The accused took Rs 3,000 from a purse and asked them to fetch Rs 7,000 more. A diamonds ring worth Rs 60,000 and a watch worth Rs 20,000 was also taken away by them. The accused then went on to threaten them from filing a police complaint.



The police officials said that they have asked the forest department to shut down the Lion point and the nearby Tiger point or bring restrictions at the spot which is thronged by tourists even past midnight.



“The incident has ruined the reputation of Lonavala. We are forced to believe that the police take bribes from miscreants as they are allowed to run the business till 3 am despite our protests,” said Surekha Jadhav, president of the Lonavala Municipal Council.


