‘There is no bigger riot-monger than Narendra Modi’: Mamata Banerjee launches fierce attack on PM - WATCH

West Bengal Chief Minister Mamata Banerjee. | AITC | Photo Credit: Twitter

Kolkata: West Bengal Chief Minister Mamata Banerjee continued to attack Narendra Modi and took a low blow at the Prime Minister today after she called him the “biggest riot monger” in the country at a campaign rally in the poll-bound state.

The bitter taste that both leaders share for each other is known to one and all, especially over the past few months, but the distasteful comments on each other have escalated lately with Didi (as Mamata is popularly known as) last week saying that ‘Modi deserves a slap of democracy’.

“There is no bigger riot-monger than Narendra Modi. I remember, when Gujarat riots happened in 2002, Atal ji (then prime minister Atal Bihari Vajpayee) had instructed him (Modi) to follow ‘raj dharma’ (fair rule). Atal ji had also warned him that he will dissolve the Gujarat government,” Mamata said at an election rally today.

There is no bigger riot-monger than Narendra Modi. I remember, when riots happened in 2002, Atal Ji had instructed him to follow raj-dharma. He had also warned him that he will dissolve the Gujarat Government: @MamataOfficial pic.twitter.com/9JiWkwRl7p — All India Trinamool Congress (@AITCofficial) May 12, 2019

She further attacked PM Modi and accused him of “running a parallel government” in Bengal and not letting her run her administration in the right way.

“Narendra Modi is running a parallel government in Bengal in the guise of elections. We are tolerating everything silently. Our courtesy is not our weakness. Who are you to interfere in law and order of my state?” she questioned.

Narendra Modi is running a parallel government in Bengal, in the guise of elections. We are tolerating everything silently. Our courtesy is not our weakness. Who are you to interfere in law and order: @MamataOfficial pic.twitter.com/iiDTtdPLgo — All India Trinamool Congress (@AITCofficial) May 12, 2019

Referring to her previous statement of ‘slapping’ the PM, she yesterday said that she does not “want to slap or touch” him.

“I did not say that I will slap you literally... I said I will give you a slap of democracy. Why would I slap you? If I slap you, I’ll break my hand...why should I do it then? You have a chest of 56 inches... How can I slap you? I don’t want to slap or touch you,” she said at a campaign rally in West Bengal today, according to news agency ANI.

Last week, Banerjee had said, “When Modi comes to Bengal and says that I am a top extortionist, I wish to slap him hard. A slap of this democracy is what he needs.” To which, Prime Minister Narendra Modi responded by saying that he would rather take the slap from her as he ‘respects her and calls her ‘didi’.
