ISIS toys with South Asia; Sri Lanka an example

By NDT Special Bureau

Easter Sunday in Sri Lanka turned bloody as a series of deadly explosions targeted three luxury hotels in the nation’s capital Colombo, and three packed Catholic churches across the country on 21st April. This was followed by two additional explosions at different sites. The tragedy occurred as Christians were gathering for Easter Sunday Masses.

A ninth explosive device, a six-foot pipe bomb found at Colombo International Airport in Sri Lanka, was successfully defused. The explosions took a heavy toll as more than 300 were reported dead and more than 500 injured. Sri Lankan police have arrested several members of suspected Islamist cells that they believe were responsible, and the Islamic State has claimed responsibility.

It must be mentioned here that on April 11, the Indian High Commission in Colombo Sri Lanka’s intelligence had issued a warning of terror attacks. The Sri Lankan authorities, however, failed to act on the information. The attacks were carried potentially by an extremist Islamist organization called the National Thowheed Jamath (NTJ).

National Thowheeth Jama’ath is an organisation comprising of extremist Muslims that was formed at least three years ago in Eastern Sri Lanka. Authorities said they knew where the group trained and had safe houses, but did not identify any of the suicide bombers, whose bodies were recovered, or the two dozen other suspects taken into custody. Initial activities of the group suggested that it was an anti-Buddhist group. In December 2018, reports linked National Thowheeth Jama’ath to acts of vandalism targeting the Buddhist temples in Mawanella, central Sri Lanka and the faces of Buddha statues that were on display outside the temples were attacked.

In 2016, Sri Lankan police arrested the outfit’s Secretary R. Abdul Razik on charges of insulting religion and giving hate speech. In March 2017, the group was involved in a violent clash in Kattankudy, a mostly Muslim community near the eastern city of Batticaloa, where one of the church bombings took place.

Unlike the LTTE, the goal of National Thowheeth Jama’ath is not insurgency. Counter-terrorism and security experts believe that the outfit believes in spreading global jihad to Sri Lankan shores. While LTTE bombings were part of an ethno-separatist movement, and did not have religious targets, the serial bombings in Sri Lanka specifically targeted the Christian community.

According to Anne Speckhard, a counter-terrorism expert and the director of the International Center for the Study of Violent Extremism, the attacks “came right out of the ISIS, Al Qaeda, global militant jihadist playbook, as these are attacks fomenting religious hatred by attacking multiple churches on a high religious holiday”. As regards the composition of the NTJ, analysts suggest that the group comprises entirely of young people, most of them being graduates of Islamic schools. There is an absence of senior leadership and an organised structure.

The use of suicide tactics and complex IEDs in the attacks suggest that local militants were supported by returnees from Syria and/or transnational groups. On 23 April, the Islamic State claimed responsibility for the attacks and began publishing images of allegedly Sri Lankan fighters.

The Islamic State group claimed responsibility and later released a video of Hashim and other men pledging their loyalty to IS leader Abu Bakr al-Baghdadi. Later, al-Baghdad praised the attackers in a video that was his first public appearance in nearly five years.

The Sri Lankan government announced that a Syrian national had been arrested in connection with the attacks, and that the intelligence warning was based on inputs from an arrested Indian militant associated with the Islamic State. The targeting of churches likely indicates intent to “avenge” the Christchurch attacks in New Zealand on 15 March.

Serial bombings in Sri Lanka have indicated that Islamic terrorism has now taken roots in the country. Sri Lanka must beef up its security. In this regard, entering into a security cooperation with neighbouring India is a feasible option which will definitely help the country in the fight against Jihad that has targeted its shores.

Photo Credit : Shutterstock

Like this: Like Loading...
