Rawat warns Pakistan of strong action against inimical acts

NEW DELHI: Army Chief Gen. Bipin Rawat on Tuesday warned Pakistan that India will not hesitate to carry out “strong action” against its inimical moves, asserting that the Army was giving enemies along the Line of Control in Jammu and Kashmir a “befitting reply” and inflicting heavy losses.

In his address at the Delhi Cantonment here on the occasion of Army Day, Gen. Rawat also said that efforts were on to maintain peace and tranquillity along the border with China, adding Army troops guarding the border will not allow any compromise on India’s interests.

Elaborating on the Army’s modernisation plan, he said a major restructuring of the force is being initiated, besides induction of a range of missiles, tanks, and other weapons including M-777 and K9 howitzers. Both M-777 howitzers and K9 Vajra, which were inducted last year, were showcased at the Army Day parade.

Gen. Rawat extensively talked about the situation in Jammu and Kashmir and said India’s neighbour on the western border continues to support terror groups operating in the state. “Our forces are giving a befitting reply to our enemies along the Line of Control. They are suffering heavy losses. I am warning our enemy (across the LoC) that we will not hesitate in carrying out strong action against any inimical action,” he said.

“We are ensuring moral dominance along the border in Jammu and Kashmir and we will continue to do so,” he assured. He said the Indian Army has ensured heavy damage to terrorists in the state. “Youths in Jammu and Kashmir are being terrorised and forced to take up arms… We do not want that people in J&K are disturbed. Our neighbouring country has a hand in these activities. Terrorists are being trained and given arms by our neighbouring country,” the Army chief said in an obvious reference to Pakistan.

On the Northeast, he said the situation is peaceful in the region and the Army is carrying out regular anti-insurgency operations. (PTI)
