We will make a stable government: CM Mamata Banerjee

West Bengal CM Mamata Banerjee took out time from her busy election schedule and spoke to Anirban Choudhury, Editor, Zee 24 Ghanta. Excerpts from the interview:

On election rallies

I have done more than 100 meetings and padyatras. I wish everyone the best.

Who will go to Delhi?

In 2014, BJP came to power on the basis of 73 seats out of 80 in UP. But they won’t get more than 13 or maybe 17 this time . If SP-BSP get 55, then the picture is pretty clear.

BJP had all 25 in Rajasthan

This time, Congress is the frontrunner.

In MP, BJP had 27 out of 29

Kamal Nath will give them a tough fight and BJP will get only about 13. Rajasthan, Maharashtra, MP will produce half the seats for BJP. So, how will they return? Down South, where they got 32 out of 191 in 2014, the number will come down to 26. In Karnataka, it will be Congress and JD(S).

Is it Modi Vs Mamata?

We are fighting the election together. It’s not that all political leaders are not speaking up. The CBI is unleashed on them as soon as they open their mouth. But I am not afraid of that; someone will have to speak up. You can say that I am speaking up from Bengal. We must dislodge BJP and save the nation. I had said in 2018 that BJP will be finished in 2019.

On backing Congress

See, BJP will be the single largest party as they will get 125-150 seats. Congress too will bag 125-130 seats. When we add the count of regional parties, the number will be more than BJP. Such a situation will arise that all regional parties will be together, and then support of the Congress can be taken. All of us will decide who would be the leader and who would run the government. All parties need to make sure that there’ll be a stable government. The Modi government has been a disaster — economy, agriculture, employment, everything — a disaster. Who can run the government well will have to be seen.

If BJP needs TMC’s support?

Under no circumstance will TMC support BJP. If someone loves us, we will go to their house and wash utensils, but if someone threatens us, we will talk back, it’s in our nature. Therefore, there’s no question of any alliance with BJP. Earlier, there was Atalji, but whom do you talk of now — the way Rajnath Singh talks. They listen to Modi and talk. How do they say that we won’t get all the four seats? Everyone’s mind has become dry like deserts.

Didn’t receive PM’s call during Fani

That’s all rubbish. He likes to do all that. He could have called me on my mobile phone. He did all that to hog credit.

On ‘Mamata dangerous to Constitution’

He (PM Modi) himself doesn’t follow the Constitution; he wants to change it. Professor Amartya Sen has been removed from Nalanda University. CBI, ED — everything has been changed. We do not believe in Modi’s but Ambedkar’s Constitution. Modi is no less than Ravan.

What to expect from the new govt?

We will take everything into consideration. I cannot give any opinion alone. We will work together.

How different is this election?

Lot of money has been spent. Helicopters are being used. Every agency and institution has been used against us. It’s an Emergency-like situation. It’s like a super Emergency. They are sitting with boxes of money. You tell me, while the cars of chief ministers are checked, why don’t they check the PM’s car? Is he any different? He’s a Fascist, he’s a Hitler bigger than Hitler himself. Therefore, the people of the country will give them an answer. What have they done in the last five years? Nothing. Demonitisation has upped terrorism by 260 per cent, 12,000 farmers have committed suicide, the economy has been destroyed. The first four years they enjoyed themselves, and in the last six months they are criticising others.

On the Opposition meet

Nothing has been decided yet. After the results on May 23, you will come to know everything.

Is the alliance solid enough?

Of course. As the day nears, we are getting stronger. We will make a stable government.
