Won’t not tolerate any lapse in drought relief: Revenue minister R V Deshpande

Cloud seeding on cards

HUBBALLI: Revenue minister R V Deshpande expressed his displeasure over the partial relaxation given by the Election Commission of India to conduct drought relief work and he wondered why complete relaxation was not given.Deshpande told reporters here on Monday that due to the EC’s stringent norms, ministers were not able review drought. “A few days ago, the ECI relaxed the rules and instructed that only ministers can hold drought review meetings and other elected representatives should not be the part of the meetings,” he said.“Anyhow, anticipating the announcement of the model code of conduct, the state government had earlier released Rs 720 crore to all district administrations and each deputy commissioner has at least Rs 10 crore at their disposal for drought relief work. A detailed review of the possible situation was done and the district administration was given clear instruction not to make any delay in relief works,” said Deshpande.“All the deputy commissioners have been assigned the responsibility of tackling the drought situation. The government will not tolerate any lapses in relief work and strict action will be taken against such officials,” he warned.“The Union government is yet to release drought relief grant for kharif. The state government had sought Rs 2,434 crore under national disaster relief fund but so far only Rs 949 crore has been released,” he said.“The Centre not yet released aid for the rabbi season loss. The state government gave a memorandum seeking Rs 2,064 crore but not a penny has been released so far,” he alleged.“Despite these hurdles, the government is doing a good job in addressing issues. Importance has been given to provide drinking water to people and cattle. Task forces have been created for drought and they are being monitored by ZP CEOs. Deputy commissioners were given the power to utilise funds for drought related work and were instructed to provide jobs to locals to prevent migration,” he said.Deshpande said the government would consider cloud seeding if the state receives less rainfall during monsoon this year. We have held ä discussion on this matter. I won’t say cloud seeding was highly successful, it had gave results in some places,” he said.
