Sabarimala temple Highlights: The two women have been moved to an undisclosed location

Violence involving BJP-RSS and CPI(M) had rocked parts of Kerala during Jan 3 hartal

Violence involving BJP-RSS and the ruling CPI(M) had rocked parts of Kerala during the January 3 hartal with several houses and shops of rival leaders and workers being attacked over the entry of two women into the temple.

The hill shrine would be closed on January 20

The hill shrine would be closed on January 20.

All women who have followed the vritham can enter Sabarimala: Surendran

Kadakampally Surendran said, “All women who have followed the vritham can enter Sabarimala. What’s happening at Sabrimala is goondaism,” reports PTI.

Stopping women from visiting Sabarimala is ‘barbaric’: Kadakampally Surendran

Devaswom Minister Kadakampally Surendran termed the act of stopping devotees (women) from visiting Sabarimala “barbaric.”. reports PTI.

P Manju made this claim in her Facebook post

P Manju (36) made this claim in her Facebook post saying she entered the shrine by acting as an old woman who was over 50 years of age.

36-yr-old Dalit woman dyes hair grey, claims she entered Sabarimala shrine

A Dalit woman activist, who is in her 30s, claimed she entered the hill shrine and had a ‘darshan’ of the presiding deity Lord Ayyappa in the early hours of January 8..

Kerala has today become hostage to corruption and communalism of LDF and UDF: PM Modi

Prime Minister Narendra Modi yesterday said, “Kerala has today become hostage to the corruption and communalism of the LDF and UDF.”

Kanaka Durga was attacked by relatives on her return home

Kanaka Durga, one of the two women who made history by becoming the first in centuries to enter the Sabarimala hill temple in Kerala, was attacked by relatives on her return home on Monday.

There have been sporadic outbreaks of violence

There have since been sporadic outbreaks of violence between the authorities and protesters attempting to prevent women from entering, setting off a cultural battle in what is still a deeply religious country.

The temple has been the site of tension

The temple has been the site of tension since the Supreme Court ruled in late September to end a ban on women of menstruating age entering it.

The two women have been moved to an undisclosed location

The two women have been moved to an undisclosed location by the police.

Two women who made history by becoming the first in centuries to enter Sabarimala hill temple in Kerala are in hiding

Two women who made history by becoming the first in centuries to enter the Sabarimala hill temple in Kerala are in hiding after threats by hardline Hindu groups.

Police used force to remove the two women to Pambha

Police used force to remove the two women to Pambha.

Kanaka Durga was attacked by her mother-in-law on her return home

One of them, Kanaka Durga, was attacked by her mother-in-law on her return home on Monday. She was admitted in a hospital at Perinthalmanna in Malappuram district.

On January 2, two women in their 40s became the first to worship at the shrine

On January 2, two women in their 40s became the first to worship at the shrine, triggering unrest in many parts of Kerala.

Kerala govt’s conduct on Sabarimala will go down in history as one of the most shameful: PM Modi

Prime Minister Narendra Modi said the state government’s conduct on Sabarimala will go down in the history as one of the most shameful.

Communists didn’t respect India’s culture and spiritual traditions: PM Modi

Prime Minister Narendra Modi on Tuesday launched a scathing attack on Kerala’s Left Democratic Front government on its handling of the Sabarimala controversy, saying the Communists didn’t respect India’s culture and spiritual traditions. He also slammed the Congress for taking multiple stands on the issue.

Female devotees aged between 10 and 50 had for decades been barred from the shrine

Female devotees aged between 10 and 50 had for decades been barred from the shrine on grounds that the presiding deity Lord Ayyappa is a celibate, and the top court’s ruling enraged traditionalists in Kerala.

We don’t need any certificate from PM Modi: Kadakampally Surendran

We don’t need any certificate from Prime Minister Narendra Modi whose party is on a mission to annihilate people in the name of cow. The PM had criticised the Left for trampling the age old beliefs and customs.

Government did not want to create a scene: Kadakampally Surendran

State temple affairs minister Kadakampally Surendran says preventing women who came after taking the vow and fast are really deplorable. The government did not want to create a scene so police took utmost restraint.

Large numbers of protestors laid on path leading to the temple

When the women reached Neelimala, large numbers of protestors laid on path leading to the temple. The drama continued for two hours and finally police removed them forcibly.

The women were dressed as men and initially they managed to dodge protestors

The women were dressed as men and initially they managed to dodge protestors. But soon some of them identified the women and encircled them.

SC in September last year allowed women of all ages to worship at Sabarimala shrine

The Supreme Court in September last year allowed women of all ages to worship at the Sabarimala shrine, overturning a centuries-old traditional ban on women of childbearing age from entering the temple.

The women started trekking at 5 am

The women used the lean time in the early hours to dodge protesters and started trekking at 5 am.

Two women attempted to reach Lord Ayyappa temple in Sabarimala

Two women in their early 30s, Reshma Nishanth and Shanila Sajesh, attempted to reach Sabarimala Lord Ayyappa temple on Wednesday morning.

SHARE THIS ARTICLE ON
