Do Away With Odd Timetable For Assamese Class In 3 Weeks: AXX

GUWAHATI: AXX (Axam Xahitya Xabha) president Paramananda Rajbongshi has set a three-week deadline for KVS (Kendriya Vidyalaya Sanghathan) for restoration of the earlier system of teaching Assamese in the Kendriya Vidyalayas in Guwahati region. However, a top KVS official of the region has spelt it out in clear terms that since it is a policy matter, it has to be raised in the KVS Board of Governors and the HRD Ministry.

In order to impart compulsory health and physical education every day from Class-I to Class-XII, Kendriya Vidyalayas in Assam have almost decimated the teaching of the Assamese language. Students learning the Assamese language have been asked to attend the class after or before the regular classes.

Making KVS’ Guwahati Region Deputy Commissioner Chandradwip Nilap sit beside him on Monday before the media, the AXX president set a three-week deadline for the KVS to restore the earlier system of teaching Assamese language, doing away with the oddest new system of teaching the language before or after regular classes.

Rajbongshi said: “Since education in mother tongue is a birth and constitutional right of every student, under no circumstances we can tolerate any conspiracy to deprive students of their right. If the earlier system of teaching the Assamese language in Kendriya Vidyalayas during the regular school hours is not restored within three weeks, we’ll have to take the course of democratic agitation to straighten the matter.”

Sitting beside Rajbongshi, Nilap, on the other hand, said: “Teaching students their mother tongue is a must. Kendriya Vidyalayas are meant for the wards of central government employees who are transferred frequently from place to place. The 40 Kendriya Vidyalayas under KVS Guwahati Region has around 35,000 students, and over 3080 of them learn the Assamese language. We engage contractual teachers to teach the language three periods a week from Classes VI to VIII. If the AXX wants to include the Assamese language in the syllabus of Kendriya Vidyalayas, the issue has to be raised before the KVS Board of Governors and the Union HRD (Human Resources Development) Ministry. Gheraoing KVS Guwahati Regional office and Kendriya Vidyalayas here won’t serve the purpose. However, since I’m here in Assam, know the pulses of the people here. I’m going to let the issue reach the KVS head office.”

Rajbongshi then said: “The issue needs the intervention of the State Chief Minister and parliamentarians. We’re trying to meet the Chief Minister on this issue. If we don’t get any positive response from the authorities concerned, we’ll have to move New Delhi with our national organizations and intellectuals.”

The crux of the problem is that – in a recent letter, the KVS Joint Commissioner, citing a new circular, asked all KVS regional offices to impart health and physical education compulsorily every day from Class-I to Class-XII. While executing this directive on health and physical education, a set of new rules have been adopted in Kendriya Vidyalayas (KVs). And in doing so, the importance of regional/additional languages has been totally decimated. Under the new timetable, students learning regional/additional languages have been made to attend such classes before or after regular school timetable.

Also Read: Top Headlines
