AAP, BJP indulge in blame game over bizman murder

Tensions grew in the Moti Nagar neighbourhood where 52-year-old businessman Dhruv Tyagi was stabbed on Sunday. Two people have been taken into custody

The death of a 51-year-old man while objecting to his daughter being harassed in West Delhi sparked a political row, on Tuesday, with leaders condemning the incident while demanding justice for the victim and parties pinning the blame on each other.

Businessman Dhruv Tyagi was stabbed outside his house in West Delhi Sunday morning when he protested his 27-year-old daughter's harassment. Police have arrested the accused, Mohammad Alam, (20) and his father Jehangir Khan (45) in the case. He succumbed to his injuries on Monday morning.

"CM Arvind Kejriwal who tweets on every national and international issue has not written a word on the incident in Delhi. Is he silent because he practices vote bank politics. Does you only speak after knowing the religion of the accused. Shameless," a tweet by BJP Delhi said targeting Delhi Chief Minister Arvind Kejriwal for not commenting on the incident allegedly because of the religion of the accused.

The tweet was shared by BJP's Delhi unit head, Manoj Tiwari who appealed everyone to come together and condemn it.

"Sad and highly condemnable. Father protested to uphold the dignity of his daughter. A brave son did his duty towards his family. Goondaism and urban naxalism have no place in our society. We should all come together and condemn it. Culprits should be punished through fast track court," Tiwari said.

The accused had passed a remark on the girl when she and her father were returning home in Moti Nagar from a hospital. After dropping the girl home, father and son came back to the spot to resolve the matter where the accused attacked and injured them. The father succumbed to his injuries on Monday morning.

"Shocked to hear of the murder of Dhruv Tyagi and attack on his son by those who harassed his daughter. There has been no response from the AAP govt. that has turned blind in their thirst for power. I condemn the heinous crime. The culprits will not be spared," said Vijender Gupta, BJP MLA and Leader of Opposition in Delhi Assembly.

The Delhi Commission for Women sought a report from Delhi Police regarding the murder following which Kejriwal tweeted, "Delhi police must take strongest action against the guilty," AAP leader and Rajya Sabha member blamed Centre for failing to keep Delhi safe for women. "Some people are giving religious angle to the unfortunate incident. I appeal to every one to condemn the incident and help bring culprit to justice. This case should be dealt in a fast track code," Singh said.

The family of the businessman family has alleged that the locals did not come to his aid and instead filmed the incident.
