Narendra Modi using pre-written media interviews to skip real issues: Rahul

Congress president once again challenged Prime Minister for a debate on various issues | File photo from REUTERS

Congress president Rahul Gandhi on Wednesday said that Prime Minister Narendra Modi was trying to divert public attention in his media interviews by focusing on irrelevant topics and skipping the burning issues country was facing.

Rahul Gandhi also accused Prime Minister Narendera Modi of using pre-scripted interviews and said that he was only speaking about irrelevant issues and skipped the burning topics.

"Modi's fear was showing in his pre-written media interviews with prepared answers to planned questions," Rahul Gandhi said.

Ridiculing the Prime Minister over his 'personal' interview, Rahul Gandhi said, "He [Modi] spoke only of irrelevant things like how he eats mangoes and how he fits his clothes into the suitcase."

Rahul also flayed Modi over the latter's personal attacks on his (Nehru-Gandhi) family, saying the Prime Minister does not know what he is saying and is just speaking for the sake of speaking.

"But I will continue to counter his hatred with love, because that is in our DNA, that is the message I have learnt from the people of Punjab and that was taught by Sri Guru Nanak Dev ji," Rahul Gandhi added.

MODI CHEATED NATION WITH BRAZEN LIES: RAHUL

Rahul Gandhi said that from making fun of Dr Manmohan Singh and his progressive economic policies, Modi had ended up becoming the butt of India's joke in five years, having cheated the nation with his brazen lies and open deception.

"Modi had ruined the nation's economy, which NYAY would revive," said Rahul, adding that like diesel in a tractor, the scheme will work as fuel to jumpstart economy.

The Congress president also once again challenged Prime Minister for a debate on various issues including the Rafale deal and demonetisation.

Countering PM Modi's claim that there was no money to fund NYAY, Rahul Gandhi said that the Congress would get the money back from thieves like Anil Ambani, Nirav Modi, Lalit Modi, Vijay Mallya and Chowksi.

Listing out NYAY, separate farmers' budget, and promise of employment for youth as the major planks of the Congress manifesto, Rahul said that the Modi government had not only failed the people on all counts but had stolen money from the people to fill the pockets of a handful of rich industrialists, helping many of them to flee the country instead of throwing them in prison for defaulting on loans worth crores of rupees.

INDIA CANNOT CHALLENGE CHINA WITHOUT MADE IN LUDHIANA

While reiterating employment generation and farmer welfare as the key priorities of the Congress, Rahul Gandhi reached out to the people in Ludhiana with the promise to put all the party's strength into reviving small and medium businesses.

"India cannot challenge China without `Made in Ludhiana', which has to be an integral part of 'Make in India'," Rahul Gandhi said, adding that without reviving small and medium businesses even employment generation could not be successful.

CONGRESS PRESSES AKALI DAL'S RUFFLED NERVE

The Congress on Wednesday pressed Akali Dal's ruffled nerve in Bargari, Faridkot which was rocked by anti-sacrilege protests in 2015.

While addressing an election rally in Bargadi, Congress president Rahul Gandhi took SAD-BJP combine head-on over the sacrilege issue.

"The perpetrators of these crimes [sacrilege] and the subsequent incidents of police firing would not be spared," Rahul Gandhi said while warning a strong action against the culprits behind the desecration of holy scriptures.

Rahul Gandhi said that those who insulted religious scriptures did not deserve any mercy.

Rahul Gandhi slammed Prime Minister Narendra Modi for his remark that the Congress did nothing during the 70 years and said it was an insult to the Punjab farmers who played a big role in the green and white revolution. Rahul Gandhi also said that PM Modi was claiming that he can alone run the country.

"Where were you when the Punjab farmers were driving the green revolution? You insulted Punjab, and the rest of India, by claiming that no development was done in 70 years and the nation was sleeping till he came to power. It is the people of India who are running the country with their blood and sweat. The Congress believed in taking every Indian, irrespective of cast, region, community, along for the development of the nation," Rahul Gandhi said while addressing rallies in support of the Congress candidates in Faridkot and Ludhiana .

Questioning what had happened to Modi's promise of 'achche din', the Congress president said after five years, Modi was not talking of any subject including jobs, Rs 15 lakh in individual bank accounts, doubling of farm income and corruption.
