Rahul Gandhi meets Alwar gang-rape survivor, says ‘justice will be done’

Congress president Rahul Gandhi on Thursday met the woman who was gang-raped in Rajasthan’s Alwar on April 26. He promised swift action against the culprits and said “justice will be done”.

“I spoke to Ashok Gehlot Ji after I heard about the incident. This is not a political issue for me. Justice will be done and action will be taken against culprits,” said Rahul Gandhi in Alwar. He said a message should be sent that ‘this will not be tolerated.”

The Congress chief was accompanied by CM Ashok Gehlot, state Congress chief Sachin Pilot, AICC general secretary Avinash Pande and Alwar MP candidate Jitendra Singh. Rahul Gandhi was scheduled to visit the survivor on Wednesday but had to postpone it due to bad weather.

On PM Narendra Modi’s charges of negligence by state government in the case, Rahul Gandhi said, “I am not here to do politics over the issue. I am here to meet the family and they will get justice”

On April 26, five men had raped a married Dalit woman in front of her husband, and later circulated the video on social media. All the accused have been arrested. The Congress government in Rajasthan has faced criticism over lack of prompt action in the case. The Rajasthan police allegedly delayed the filing of a First Information Report (FIR). An FIR was filed only after a purported video of the sexual assault began circulating on social media.

Also read:On PM’s ‘crocodile tears’ remark, BSP chief Mayawati’s stinging comeback

Prime Minister Narendra Modi had referred to the gang-rape incident at a poll rally and attacked the Congress. He has also asked Bahujan Samaj Party chief Mayawati she had not withdrawn support from the Congress government in Rajasthan. Mayawati had hit back at PM Modi accusing him of indulging in “dirty politics”.

Ashok Gehlot on Thursday accused PM Modi of doing politics over the issue said an FIR was lodged on May 2. “He (Modi) speaks lies, which is unfortunate. The entire BJP is protesting, shows who is doing politics,” Gehlot said.

The incident triggered widespread protests in Alwar, Jaipur, Dausa and nearby areas and a protest march led by BJP’s Rajya Sabha MP Kirori Lal Meena had turned violent in Dausa on Tuesday, leaving over half a dozen people injured.
