21-year-old sexually harassed

sexually harassed

sex

parking lot

By Pragna L KrupaA 21-year-old woman wasby a co-worker, who was trying to coax her to havewith him. The woman claimed the man had forcefully taken her to the outskirts of the city on Friday and molested her. The man has been harassing her from the past three months, and she filed a complaint with the Subramanyanagar police on Sunday.The accused, Yeshwanth, an AC technician, has been arrested. The woman works at theof a private company.The woman stated in her complaint that she has been working at the company from past six months and the accused has been trying to talk to her and gradually started misbehaving with her when she was alone.He managed to get her mobile number and started calling her.On Friday morning, Yeshwanth called her and asked her to meet him near their office.The woman decided to confront him. She met him around 3 pm when he forcefully took her towards Nelamangala on his bike and stopped his bike at a deserted place, molested her and asked her to get into a physical relationship with him. When she threatened to go to the police if he continued with his ways, he decided to drop her back home.When he called and harassed her again on Sunday, she decided to go to the police.A customer was beaten up by the shopkeeper with a wooden log after he requested the shopkeeper to replace a nail cutter as it was not sharp enough, on Tuesday in Yeshwantpur.The victim, Mohammad Javeriya, 27, a resident of Vidayaranyapura, has filed a complaint against the shopkeeper Mohin. He told the police he was at the Yeshwantpur railway station and bought a nail cutter, while waiting for a train. As he was coming out of the shop, he tried the nail clipper and it didn’t work. He requested for a replacement and Mohin picked up a fight with him, asking him to buy a new one. When Javeriya insisted, Mohin abused him and later picked up a wooden log and beat him with it. Javeriya’s cousin, who intervened, was also assaulted.
