Delhi HC Issues Notice to Govt, RBI on Bank Merger Plan

The Delhi High Court today issued notice to the government of India in a petition filed jointly by the All India Bank Officers’ Confederation (AIBOC), and the All India Vijaya Bank Officers’ Association, against the proposed amalgamation of Vijaya Bank and Dena Bank with the Bank of Baroda, and against the scheme of amalgamation published on 2 January 2019 under Section 9(6) of the of the Banking Companies (Acquisition and Transfer of Undertakings) Act(s), 1970/80. The merger, aiming at consolidating and integrating smaller banks with bigger banks, was to have been operational on from 1 April 2019.

A bench led by Justice S Raveendra Bhat issued the notice to the finance ministry, RBI, Bank of Baroda, Dena Bank and Vijaya Bank.

The petitioners have challenged the decision making process involved in going ahead with the merger, contending that the decision making process is vitiated on several grounds.

The petition points out that even though the three banks are publicly listed companies, their boards have acted under the diktat of the government as the concurrence of the respective boards appears to have been manufactured and taken under compulsion. The government, says the petition, has not acted like a model promoter and has instead presented a fait accompli to the bank boards.

The petition further states that there was no prior consultation with RBI, which is mandated by the Banking Regulation Act and the Bank Nationalisation Act.

The merger plan has also been challenged on the ground that officer and workmen directors were missing from the three boards that took the decision. These posts are mandated under the Bank Nationalisation Act, which the government has not filled up for over three years, despite orders from Delhi HC in another related petition filed by AIBOC.

The petition also questions the merit of the decision, particularly that of Vijaya Bank, which is presently a profitable bank with a positive Return on Assets (RoA) and its amalgamation with a negative RoA bank to form a bigger entity would adversely affect the interests and fundamental rights of a large number of persons, including members of the organisations.

The court reiterated its earlier direction to place on record all relevant files/ records and minutes of meetings and listed the matter for final hearing on 13 February, 2019.
