Oakridgers’ Triumph in CBSE Grade 12 Results

Hyderabad: Oakridgers’ across all campuses emerged triumphantly in the recently announced CBSE Grade 12 results. Over 209 students from across three Oakridge campuses appeared in this years’ exam, off which 36 students achieved 90% and above. Over 127 students achieved 75% and above beating their last year performance.

Tripti Singhania & Poorvi Mohan Kumar from Oakridge Gachibowli campus were the top scorers overall. While, Shubanghi Gupta (477/500) from Gachibowli campus, Sri Moukthika Garimella (469/500) from Bachupally campus and Samanvitha Goluguri (465/500) from Visakhapatnam campus were other top performers this year.

“Oakridge International School has been a part of me for 15 years of my life now. The homely environment with amazing teachers and interactive extra-curricular activities have helped me get all the experiences that raised me to the platform where I stand now making my school and family proud achieving 96% in boards,” said Oakridger Tripti Singhania, who achieved a top score of 480.

Top scorer Poorvi Mohan Kumar said, “Oakridge international school provided me with the best high-school learning experience. The school aided us immensely with quality study material and this boosted our confidence in the subject. With this kind of support from my both, my parents and teachers, I was able to achieve a 96% in boards. I could strike a perfect balance between my academics and extra- curricular.”

Speaking on the occasion, Ms. Hemalatha Sanjay, Principal Oakridge International School (Bachupally campus) said, “Our CBSE grade 12 results have been remarkable. We are delighted to see that the hard work and efforts of our students have yielded these splendid results. I would also like to make a special mention of the efforts my teachers have put to warrant such phenomenal results. Class average 80% for both Commerce and Science is a prodigious accomplishment. It is indeed a proud moment for us.”

Moukthika Garimella, Top scorer from Oakridge Bachupally campus says that her 10 years at Oakridge taught her to think differently and confidently. “I express my sincere gratitude and gratefulness to all my teachers and staff that have supported me throughout my schooling ensuring that my morale stays high and encouraging me to raise the bar high every single time.” Moukthika aspires to be a medical scientist one day.

“Schooling at Oakridge International School has been an amazing journey of growth and self-discovery. I express a deep sense of gratitude to my teachers and parents who always supported me and made sure that my morale was high all the time and helped me achieve 93% in boards,” said Oakridger Samanvitha Goluguri.

Oakridge Bachupally & Visakhapatnam campuses recorded a 100% pass percentage and 8 students from across all campuses achieved a cent-percent score in various subjects like Biology, Informatics, Fine arts and fashion studies.

Speaking on the occasion, Mr. Biju Baby, Principal Oakridge International School (Visakhapatnam) said, “It is noteworthy, that our students continue to make us proud in CBSE grade 12 results without pressure of conventional schooling. They could achieve this while they continue to pursue their varied interest and passion. I congratulate the teachers for inspiring the students to achieve their best.”
