Fighting Venom With Venom: Is There A Case For Using Al Qaeda Against ISIS?

In a tete-a-tete with Anne Speckhard , the ideology-messiah of Al-Qaeda, Abu Qatada, abhors emotional outburst of anger through suicide bombings. “I am Abu Qatada talking from a scientific position. This I will not allow.”

He goes on to tell Speckhard that the Palestinian lady suicide bomber, Wafa Idris, was acting from emotions, and that “we cannot possibly know the depth of pain for what motivated her to engage in suicide bombing.”

So, what exactly were Hashim and party doing on 21 April 2019 as they blew themselves up in churches and luxury hotels at various cities of Sri Lanka? Were they just following the orders of ISIS? Were they just foot soldiers in this global jihad without any consciousness on their part? Or did they have full consciousness of participation through the enlightenment they received from the Islamic preachers over a sustained period of time? Or was it that they simply wished to be famous and die not unheard of?

At least financial considerations could not have been the motive for all, with Inshaf Ahmed Ibrahim, another perpetrator of violence reportedly being the owner of ‘Colossus Copper’, a manufacturing facility. A glance at the website of the company reveals the following:

“Our parent company M/s. Ishana Exports Pvt Ltd was incorporated in 1986 as a small spice merchant and today proud to be the biggest exporter of spices from Sri Lanka.”

Teachings, indoctrination, brain-washing—all these words could be used, yet, as Simon Cottee aptly points out, it would be extremely difficult to unravel the rationale behind the recruitment and spread of Islamic jihad.

The ‘Counter Extremism Project’ informs that the Jordanian Salafi cleric, Abu Qatada, has been an outspoken critic of ISIS . The policy organisation refers to some analysts who believe the Jordanian government hopes to use anti-ISIS radical clerics like Qatada to turn jihadists away from ISIS.

Al Qaeda or ISIS?

Why not find out more Qatadas and explore this option of weakening the radical ideology of ISIS? Why not stoke the prevailing ideological schism between the two major wings of Islamic terrorism and pitch one against the other?

A major difference of ideology between Al Qaeda and ISIS is with regard to attacks on places of worship of non-believers (minorities) as well as non-conformist Muslim groups. In fact, Al Qaeda leader Ayman al-Zawahari had issued a set of guidelines for jihad , urging his followers to exhibit restraint in attacking non-Muslims as well as ‘other Muslim sects’ like the Shias.

While Al Qaeda and its international affiliates have been a disciplined lot in not attacking places worship, ISIS and its proxies strictly follow Al Zarqawi’s legacy of bomb attacks on Sufi and Shia mosques, churches and synagogues. The Easter bombings in Sri Lanka and the blast near Data Darbar Sufi mosque in Lahore are the latest instances.

As a natural fallout, the attacks can automatically extend to temples, gurudwaras and similar religious places in the immediate future. In fact, with the declaration of a new emir in the Bengal region and a so-called ‘province’ in Kashmir, such attacks are now to be expected within India. Moreover this being the holy month of Ramadan, Islamic preachers can very well motivate gullible jihadists into suicide action.

To contain an ultra-radical ISIS, an Al Qaeda can be a tactical option. An ideological conflict between the two may possibly lead to a reverse rise of Al Qaeda. However, such a scenario can lead to a ‘circulation of terrorist groups’ and not an end to Islamic terrorism per se. A solution to end Islamic terrorism should then be explored with a combination of military, political, propaganda and sociological tools.
