US sends warning to Iran as naval aircraft vessel ARRIVES to Arabian Sea

Iran: Tensions with US at a ‘dangerous point’ says expert

top stories direct to your inbox SUBSCRIBE Invalid email Sign up to receive our rundown of the day'sdirect to your inbox We use your sign-up to provide content in ways you've consented to and to improve our understanding of you. This may include adverts from us and 3rd parties based on our understanding. You can unsubscribe at any time. More info

The naval aircraft carrier is on-hand for what Washington calls an “imminent threat” from Tehran. The Nimitz-class ship which is over 1,000 feet-long, is comprised of four vessels including destroyers and cruisers. The vessel was forced to be re-directed from the Mediterranean amid the rising conflict between the two world superpowers.

Iran has seen the arrival of the US military fleet as a direct threat has vowed it is ready for full military battle. Major General Hossein Salam, commander-in-chief of the Islamic Revolutionary Guards, stated Iran was ready for “full-scale confrontation with the enemy”. Iran also boasted about the strength of its arsenal of weapons insisting it could “easily” hit US warships situated in the Gulf.

USS Abraham Lincoln has been deployed to the Arabian Sea

Major Salam also warned Mr Trump that his “maximum pressure” strategy would fail because of Iran’s “resistance, persistence and endurance”. He added: “Our enemies have reached the end of the line and, despite their apparent awesomeness, they have osteoporosis from within.” The relationship between the world superpowers have been strained for over a year, following Mr Trump’s decision to pull out of the landmark 2015 Iran nuclear deal.

US would win war against Iran in 'two strikes' says Senator

Supreme Leader Ayatollah Ali Khamenei said this week Tehran would not negotiate another deal, which curbs Iran’s nuclear programme in exchange for the lifting of international sanctions. Tehran also notified the five remaining signatories that it would reduce some commitments under the treaty. The US had hoped the sanctions and economic pressure would force Tehran to accept tougher curbs on its nuclear and missile programs and on its support for proxies in Iraq, Syria and Yemen. Meanwhile the US president has played down the conflict by stating he does not want a war with Iran.
