Rise And Fall Of TV9 Ravi Prakash

Kommineni Srinivasa Rao

Andhra Pradesh has been witness to many interesting events over the past one and a half years. One has seen the drama surrounding Operation Garuda backed by a powerful media campaign. Actor Sivaji came out with a new conspiracy theory that some forces were out to overthrow Chandrababu Naidu from his chief ministership in AP. Telugu Desam party’s yellow media played up his theory, complete with graphics, in a big way. As if on cue, Chandrababu Naidu would repeat this story in public meetings.

If anything, Chandrababu Naidu undermined his own position by attaching too much importance to actor Sivaji. But, that is another subject altogether. The TDP chief is now making every attempt to shield Sivaji whose involvement is seen in such conspiracies and plots. This becomes obvious from Chandrababu Naidu’s attempts to give more importance to plots and conspiracies in the name of political strategy.

Sivaji became synonymous with Garuda Purana after he came out with the theory of operation Garuda. His critics often used this tag while referring to him. It is also clear that Sivaji who was once critical of the TDP supremo, later cosied up to him as part of a plan and a plot.

Once the criminal case involving former CEO of TV9 Ravi Prakash and Sivaji broke out into the open, the conspiracy angle was exposed. When actor Sivaji spoke of Operation Garuda, people thought that it related to someone in authority in the government.

Shockingly, however, a murderous attack took place on Leader of Opposition in Andhra Pradesh, YS Jagan Mohan Reddy at the Visakhapatnam airport on October 25, 2018. From the manner in which Chandrababu Naidu and Andhra Pradesh DGP RP Thakur reacted after this vicious attack on the life of the Leader of Opposition in Andhra Pradesh, people began to raise the question whether this was also a part of Garuda Purana enunciated by Sivaji.

It became obvious that as part of this conspiracy, Chandrababu Naidu refused to hand over the case to either CBI or NIA. It is also evident that the manner in which Chandrababu Naidu and other TDP leaders ridiculed YSRCP and downplayed the murderous attack on YS Jagan, was a part of this diabolical plot.

After some time, the data theft case came to light. The Telangana police registered a case against the CEO of IT Grids Ashok Dakavaram and the authorities suspect the involvement of the TDP in transferring sensitive information belonging to the people to a private firm. It also became clear to all that the TDP leadership was shielding Ashok Dakavaram, the CEO of IT Grids in Amaravati.

It must be assumed that this conspiracy was also a part of Garuda Purana. The latest conspiracy which has come to light involving former CEO of TV9 Ravi Prakash and Sivaji, to pose hurdles in the takeover of the channel by the new management, has come as a surprise to many, especially since the new group has majority holding.

Ravi Prakash and Sivaji’s dark deal to create problems in the takeover of TV9 by the new management headed by prominent industrialist Rameshwar Rao, is indeed an audacious step. It is not clear whether Ravi Prakash manipulated Sivaji and drew him into this conspiracy or whether Sivaji did not cooperate with Ravi Prakash, but now it is evident that both of them have landed in a soup and had to do the disappearing act.

The buzz is that both Ravi Prakash and Sivaji are being sheltered in Amaravati. Chandrababu Naidu has been claiming that PM Modi, Telangana Chief Minister K Chandrashekar Rao and YS Jagan are conspiring against him, but as it turns out, it is his men who are involved in all kinds of conspiracies, as has been proved over and over again in recent months. Had PM Modi, YS Jagan or KCR been involved in any conspiracy, Chandrababu Naidu would have created a huge issue out of it.

He would have shouted from the rooftops to draw the attention of anyone who is willing to listen and his media megaphones would have gone into an overdrive.

The TDP chief is now gripped by anxiety as more skeletons are tumbling out of closets which are close to the TDP‘s fold. Rumours say he approached Eenadu owner Ramoji Rao to discuss ways of shielding Ravi Prakash. Meanwhile, the mail trail generated in April 2019, exposing the fake agreement between Ravi Prakash and Sivaji purporting to have signed on it last February, was unearthed by the police.

All in all, Sivaji, the scriptwriter of what came to be known as Garuda Purana, who wanted to tarnish YSRCP’s reputation, sullied his image to the extent that he himself had to go into hiding. The moral of the Ravi Prakash-Sivaji saga is that lies and conspiracies cannot triumph over truth.

Also Read: TV9 Ravi Prakash-Sivaji Deleted Email Chain Retrieved From Hard Disks

Also Read: Is Ravi Prakash Holed Up In Vijayawada?

Also Read: Mahesh Watch Catches Eyeballs At Maharshi Event: Can You Guess The Brand?

Also Read: Who Is This Yogi Adityanath’s Look-Alike Beside Akhilesh Yadav?
