WYWS: Fatal ATV crash, Austrian vice-chancellor resigns after 'stupid, irresponsible' offer

Article content

Toronto man, 58 dies of injuries suffered in ATV crash: Peterborough, Ont., OPP are investigating the death of a Toronto man who crashed an ATV in the Municipality of Trent Lakes. Police say 58-year-old Quang Danh suffered fatal injuries in the accident late Friday afternoon. Investigators say he was driving the ATV on private property and wasn’t using proper safety equipment at the time of crash.

We apologize, but this video has failed to load.

tap here to see other videos from our team. Try refreshing your browser, or WYWS: Fatal ATV crash, Austrian vice-chancellor resigns after 'stupid, irresponsible' offer Back to video

Austrian vice chancellor resigns amid video scandal: Austrian vice chancellor Heinz-Christian Strache announced Saturday he is resigning after two German newspapers published footage of him apparently offering lucrative government contracts to a potential Russian benefactor. Strache said Saturday in a statement before assembled journalists that he was illegally set up in a “political assassination” but added his behaviour in the video was “stupid, irresponsible and a mistake.” The scandal has led to speculation about the future of the governing coalition between Strache’s anti-immigration Freedom Party and Chancellor Sebastian Kurz’s centre-right People’s Party. Scenarios include replacing Strache in the cabinet with another party member or ending the coalition for new elections. Kurz has so far not spoken publicly.

Photo by Jeff Sherman / AP

U.S. warns airliners flying in Persian Gulf amid Iran tensions: U.S. diplomats warned Saturday that commercial airliners flying over the wider Persian Gulf faced a risk of being “misidentified” amid heightened tensions between the U.S. and Iran. The warning relayed by U.S. diplomatic posts from the Federal Aviation Administration underlined the risks the current tensions pose to a region crucial to global air travel. It also came as Lloyd’s of London warned of increasing risks to maritime shipping in the region. Concerns about a possible conflict have flared since the White House ordered warships and bombers to the region to counter an alleged, unexplained threat from Iran that has seen America order nonessential diplomatic staff out of Iraq. President Donald Trump since has sought to soften his tone. Meanwhile, authorities allege that a sabotage operation targeted four oil tankers off the coast of the United Arab Emirates, and Iran-aligned rebels in Yemen claimed responsibility for a drone attack on a crucial Saudi oil pipeline.
