Top Stories From AP, Telangana On May 16

1. Naidu Meets Rahul

Chief Minister Chandrababu Naidu met Congress president Rahul Gandhi in New Delhi today. Both leaders discussed on the future plan of action after the results and the repolling at Chandragiri Assembly constituency.

2. Lookout Notice To Ex-TV9 Telugu’s CEO

-Cyberabad police issued lookout notices again against the ex-chief executive officer of TV9 Ravi Prakash and actor Shivaji. The two failed to appear even after police issued three notices to them.

3. Mulugu MLA’s Car Rams Into Two-Wheeler

-Mulugu MLA Seethakka aka Dansari Anasuya's car rammed into two-wheeler at Eturu Nagaram today. A three-year-old girl died while her parents sustained injuries.

4. Actor Rallapalli Venkata Narasimha Rao Passes Away

-Veteran Telugu actor Rallapalli Venkata Narasimha Rao passed away at a private hospital in Hyderabad on Friday while undergoing treatment. He was reportedly suffering from a lung ailment and has acted in over 800 films.

5. YSRCP Leaders Meet EC

A delegation of YSR Congress party leaders and MPs met the Election Commission today to make special arrangements for the counting day on May 23. They complained that TDP leaders can crate disruption in the day.

6. Naidu Accuses EC

Chief Minister Chandrababu Naidu accused the Election Commission of being pro-government and demanded action against BJP's Bhopal candidate Pragya Thakur for "insulting" Mahatma Gandhi.

7. Activists Protest At Osmania University

-Activists belonging to various organisations took to peaceful protest at the Hyderabad’s Osmania University to oppose the renaming of the University’s library to Bharat Ratna Dr BR Ambedkar Library.

8. Minor Girl Gang Raped

A minor girl was gang raped in the outskirts of Gajwel town in Telangana’s Siddipet. According to police, the man had befriended her over call. The accused are on the run.

9. No Respite For Telugus

There is no respite from the scorching heat in Telangana as the Indian Meteorological Department has issued yet another 4-day warning for a heat wave. Temperatures across the state continued to soar above 40 degree Celsius.

10. Owiasi Hits Out At BJP

AIMIM chief Asaduddin Owaisi hit out at the BJP on Pragya Singh Thakur's remark calling Godse as a patriot saying that the ruling party was standing by independent India's first terrorist. He ironically tweeted saying in a few years, Godse will also be recommended with a Bharat Ratna.

11. EC Orders Re-Poll

With the Election Commission ordering re-poll in five polling booth following a demand of the YSRCP, the TDP too has demanded re-polling in 19 polling booths in seven constituencies across Andhra Pradesh.

(Courtesy | Arpita Ghosh: Writer | Johnson D’Souza: Narrator | Laxmikanth Patwari : Video Editor)

Also Read: Who Is This Yogi Adityanath’s Look-Alike Beside Akhilesh Yadav?
