BMC identifies 'dangerous buildings' ahead of monsoons, sets May 31 deadline to fill all potholes in Mumbai

Praveen Pardeshi replaced Ajoy Mehta as the BMC commissioner earlier this month (Representative Image) | Photo Credit: BCCL

Mumbai: Ahead of the monsoon season, the civic body of India's economic capital has released a survey report saying that 499 buildings across Mumbai have been classified under C1 category, deeming them dangerous. In its report, the Brihanmumbai Municipal Corporation (BMC) has claimed that the number of buildings falling in the C1 category has fallen from 619 buildings in the previous year.

India's richest civic body, BMC classifies buildings in three categories, namely C1, C2, and C3. While C1 is the tag given to dangerous buildings, structures in need of major structural repairs are classified under C2 and ones which need minor repairs to fall in the C3 category.

A large number of the buildings falling in the C1 category are in N-ward which comprises parts of Ghatkopar followed by K west and T. While 64 of the 499 buildings are in N-ward, there are 47 such structures in T-ward and 41 in K-west-ward. An official with the civic body told Times of India that several dangerous buildings have been demolished over the years owing to their dilapidated condition and some of the buildings were repaired and are not dangerous anymore.

(Maharashtra Chief Secretary and former BMC commissioner Ajoy Mehta with newly-appointed municipal commissioner Praveen Pardeshi)

He added that residents of such buildings which fall into the C1 category are served notices and asked to vacate. Water and electricity supply are disconnected if the residents do not vacate the buildings, he said. Newly-appointed BMC municipal commissioner Praveen Pardeshi held a pre-monsoon preparedness meeting at the civic body's headquarters on Friday. Reports assert that he has asked officials to ensure curbing of instances of building collapses or landslides which may lead to mass casualties.

Reports by sections of the media also stated that the officials with the BMC, Brihanmumbai Electrical Supply and Transport (BEST), Maharashtra Housing and Area Development Authority (MHADA), Mumbai Metropolitan Region Development Authority (MMRDA), Public Works Department (PWD), National Disaster Relief Force (NDRF) and Indian Navy held a meeting on Friday. As a result, concerned agencies have decided to fill all potholes in the city by May 31. The civic body has claimed that it cleared 2.44 lakh tonnes out of 3.49 lakh tonnes of silt from major nullahs in the city.
