Design to unseat Nepal PM Oli begins; Gulf Kingdom comes to help Pakistan

By NP Upadhaya: Kathmandu, Nepal’s crane elevated Foreign Minister Mr. Pradip Kumar Gyawali has talked sense very freshly in Delhi.

He says “if President Donald Trump can meet North Korean leader Kim Jong-Un then why not India and Pakistan could mend their differences and allow the stalled SAARC meet to resume its regular activities?

To recall, since 2016, the SAARC regional body remains in a dormant state. Instead, India has been encouraging the BIMSTEC, the Bay of Bengal Initiative, by killing the SAARC. Candidly speaking, India wants to isolate Pakistan-a country which in a matter of few years is sure to become a game changer in this greater South Asian landmass thanks due to the CPEC-the joint initiatives taken by Pakistan and China.

How India would see Pakistan then would be a matter of great curiosity for the countries inhabiting this part of greater South Asia.

India is hell bent on degrading Pakistan even if the latter has a new Prime Minister, Imran Khan, who prefers an amicable solution to the overly stretched Kashmir issue and then live a happy and peaceful life with its immediate neighbor-India. PM Khan is on record to have made several proposals to India and the latest being while inauguration the Kartarpur Sahib road for the easy and problem free passage to the Indian Sikhs to enter into Pakistan in order to pay respects to Guru Nanak Sahib.

“Modi’s India has failed in all her efforts to isolate Pakistan. Pakistan’s importance in world politics and diplomacy is now more than ever before. In theory, India may be secular but in reality she is a religious fundamentalist, trained in extremism and violent politics. Challenging the Ideology of Pakistan India demands the Islamic Republic to declare itself secular. This is an existential question for Pakistan” so wrote very freshly one Pakistani scholar.

While the opening of this Road has pleased the Indian Sikhs including Nav Jot Soingh Siddhu, but on the contrary the Indian government in Delhi takes this Road could be well used and over used by the Pakistani establishment for encouraging the Indian Sikhs to step up the Khalistan movement. But this road could also be manipulated conversely by the Indian government for exporting a few more persons like Kul Bhusan Yadav into the Pakistani soil with turbans in the head. Nepal has terrible experience with the Indian RAW functionaries.

The new citizenship bill shall double the fear.

The UN body too has been apparently influenced, or at least this much is being alleged, by the Indian regime for not having taken up the Kashmir issue as is being repeatedly appealed by Pakistan in a way that the settlement of the ongoing conflict deserved. South Asian political stability much depends on the early and the final resolution of the lingering Kashmir issue, this is how the matter stands today as both the adversaries possess nuclear weapons. The nuclear threat looms in South Asia indeed.

Thanks the United Nations Secretary General is soon to land in Islamabad.

India remains undeterred and continues to malign Pakistan here and there and everywhere. It is this Indian arrogance and myopic vision that has forced the countries and the people living in this part of what scholar Mushahid Hussain says Greater South Asian region to inch closer to the Chinese regime though these countries siding with China understand better that China too may not be that much of a good option in the long run but yet it is good to live with lesser evil as against the born expansionist devil.

By the way, India has gulped some sixty thousand hectares of Nepali landmass, so claims border expert Mr. Buddhi Narayan Shrestha. For the India tilted Nepali media, this is no news at all. The reasons are quite understandable.

Senior analyst Mr. Bharat Dahal appropriately summarizes the continued deterioration of Nepali politics as to have been the sum total of the handiwork of those who through the forceful imposition of the Delhi designed 12 point formula took total control over the fundamentals of this ancient nation through the present day rulers of Nepal who have had been “nominated” by the then Delhi rulers. That time the Indian Congress was in government ruled by Mrs. Sonia Gandhi. The proxy Prime Minister was Dr. MM Singh –largely taken as the accidental Prime Minister of India.

High placed sources in Delhi opine that Nepal’s Hindu identity was scrapped under the straight instructions of Mrs. Sonia Gandhi who is herself a Christian woman born in Italy. Former President Pranav Mukherjee is on record to have authentically claimed in his newly published book that Mrs. Gandhi possess some sort of hatred for the Hindu religion.

Analysts here believe that she may have influenced the then Nepali leaders to do away with the Hindu identity of Nepal for multiple reasons.

Says Dahal while talking to the Danfey Television (taken note on January 13, 2019) that Nepal will further slide whether it be Deuba, Mr. Nepal, Prachanda or even KP Oli-the incumbent Prime Minister.

According to senior analyst Dahal, it is this set of present day rulers of Nepal who have been nominated by Delhi regime to control Nepal on a rotation basis and serve the nominator uninterrupted.

Mr. Dahal thus believes that India from time to time warns Delhi trained Nepali rulers that they should ensure that President of China, Xi Xinping, under no circumstances lands in Nepal.

Unfortunately, mini Beijing in Kathmandu takes the India posted sleuths as “friends of China”.

“Our own leaders have in the past betrayed China which forced the Northern neighbor to postpone its President’s visit to Nepal”, reveals analyst Dahal who himself was in the past a high ranking Maoists leader when the party have had been enjoying the Delhi government’s hospitality in NOIDA suberbs.

Mr. Dahal some five years ago talking to this scribe for the telegraphnepal.com had told as to how the Indian security machinery used to shield the Nepal Maoists while the rebels were in Delhi under the special care of the New Delhi regime.

“I quit the Maoists party for good when I could see for myself that the party had been working to damage Nepal with the close collaboration of the Indian regime”, so told Dahal to the telegraph Nepal portal.

This should perhaps explain as to how the Maoists were “exported” to Nepal by the Shyam Saran clique and told to destroy Nepal to what they did and have yet been doing the same. The Maoists shall pay the salt debt.

Sharp brains in Kathmandu conclude that it is the Indian brain that has told Comrade Prachanda to remain glued with the UML and damage ultimately and has concurrently ordered Dr. BR Bhattarai, the disciple of SD Muni, to wear democratic clothes in order to do away with the system now in force in Nepal.

SD Muni’s hatred for Nepal has no limits.

The tentative Indian design, as much as it could be guessed is to depute its “trusted and tested men” into potential political parties and through their trusted warriors Sikkimise Nepal ultimately and if it is not possible then at least Bhutanise this ancient nation.

And who else could be more trustful than those two sharp brains, Comrade Prachanda and Dr. BR Bhattarai to destroy Nepal? It is these two illustrious Nepali leaders who have enjoyed the Indian government’s hospitality while waging the so called people’s War. The War was on Nepal by residing in New Delhi enjoying Indian security umbrella. The Royal treatment they received while being in Delhi, says analyst Dahal.

The first target was the institution of the Monarchy and the second target visibly is the NC-the oldest democratic party of Nepal. Looking at the pathetic state of the NC as a party that it stands today, it could be concluded that the attack on the NC has worked as preferred. The NC is a weak political force, let’s call it a sinking horse, which is struggling hard to keep its existence intact. The third and the final attack expectedly is the institution of the Nepal Army. The idea is to weaken and demoralize the Nepal Army so that it could not perform the duties for which the institution is meant for. Having attacked all these vital organs of the Nepali State, the final effort will be on the merger of the ancient country a la Sikkim into the Indian Union hopefully. Bids towards this end are already afoot, we have been told.

Former Nepal Army Chief Rukmangad Katuwal is talked to have been “hand in glove” while the new republican leaders forcefully ousted the Nepali monarchy. Mr. Katwal now laments perhaps. This does mean that the “penetration” was there since long. And very freshly, the new Army Chief was in Delhi. He may have been, let’s hope so, seduced. However, high placed sources in Kathmandu claim that the incumbent Nepal Army Chief Mr. Thapa will be privately told to assist the ousted King if he dares to bounce back into the national politics.

This is the undeclared game of the traditional neighbor which could be sensed from its bilateral dealings with Nepal wherein she always ignores and insults this nation through the kind courtesy of its deputed political creatures in Kathmandu. The straight no to the report submitted by the eminent persons group, EPG, to the Indian government is yet to be accepted by the Indian PM Modi who has hinted that the EPG’s final draft was simply unacceptable to the Indian regime as the fresh draft clearly talks that Nepal must not remain the security umbrella of the Indian regime. This change in the 1950 treaty India would love to reject. India thinks as to how Nepal could dare to go out from the grip of the Indian machinery beginning from the days of PM Nehru?

The Communist unification is believed to be a part of the same Indian grand design whose final aim is to split Nepal into several pieces.

The manner Nepal’s accidental Prime Minister KP Sharma Oli just the previous week exhibited his abhorrence and utter disregard to the revered unifier of the nation, King Prithvi, does tell that how could a Prime Minister of a country ignore the Himalayan contributions of a person who ensured and established the existence of a nation of which he is the chief of the executive?

Sorry to say, observers now wish to recall some facts that very much shed light on the very nationalist credentials, the fake one in effect, of Nepal’s Prime Minister Oli who in a visible and vocal manner lauded the Nepal-India Mahakali Treaty. In fact, KP Sharma Oli was the single UML leader after Madhav Nepal who almost danced to the Indian tune while the process of Parliamentary ratification of the Mahakali treaty was on in the mid-nineties. He was beaming as if the heaven has come down earth and that the treaty just ratified would make Nepal a country where no trace of poverty could be found.

Since the unequal Mahakali treaty ratification, KP Sharma Oli is considered to have willingly entered into the India’s list of trusted men list which tentatively continues even as of today, it is talked. Then began Oli’s regular trip to Delhi’s Medanta Hospital where he enjoyed Indian hospitality, it is still rumored.

However, the treaty much appreciated and applauded by the present day Nepal Prime Minister then in the mid-nineties instead died an unnatural death. Albeit, the Mahakali treaty exposed the entire set of the Nepali leaders more so of the present day Prime Minister Mr. Oli as to have been the “yes man” of the Indian regime. This is what is still being believed in Nepal’s political circuit.

PM Oli is taken as a rotten egg in Nepali politics. Diplomatic sources say that India has been thinking to unseat PM Oli for Delhi concludes that Oli has a clear tilt for China-the arch rival of India. Mr. Bijay Jolly, T Hermis and Shyam Saran-the anti-China men in Delhi-have been authorized and duly deputed for the same purpose by PM Modi’s servants in Delhi to destabilize Nepal PM Oli. The shortest route to unseat PM Oli will be to bring into use the clout of the declared Delhi-NOIDA man, Comrade Prachanda who is also one of the coalition partner in this unified government. In fact, Prachanda just needs an inkling from Delhi and Oli is in the foot path.

That such hint has already approached Kathmandu gets reflected when one listens to the fiery speeches made recently by a highly trusted media man wherein he bluntly speaks in favor of Comrade Prachanda. He says that it is only Chabilal Dahal who could change the face of this nation and make ultimately Nepal a prosperous country. The media man’s tilt to India remains no longer a secret.

This perhaps means that PM Oli’s days are numbered. This could also be a “grand” ploy of India to distance the dates of the arrival of Chinese President Xi Xinping to Nepal.

This likelihood can’t be ruled out. Some even claim that Modi’s “invisible” servants are already in Kathmandu who shall for sure receive the needed helps from the so called vibrant Nepali media as usual. New Delhi has strong connections with the high flying Nepali media personals-the same journos that had applauded the change of 2005-6, if one were to recall. Some of them have begun repenting.

Now a let’s have a look into the new developments that have happened in this region including Pakistan which has been struggling with the financial crunch as regards the projects associated with the CPEC-a joint venture of Pakistan with emerging Super Power China. The Saudi Kingdom has come to the rescue of Pakistan in a fresh political development. The Saudis do not enjoy good relations currently with the US administration. So is Pakistan and thus their coming closer has some meaning underneath.

Saudi Arabia is set to become “an important partner of China-Pakistan Economic Corridor (CPEC)”, a Pakistani minister said over the weekend as Riyadh confirmed that the Gulf kingdom will build a mega refinery in Pakistan’s deep water port of Gwadar, which is being developed with funding from China, reports CGTN news service.

An agreement for the 10 billion U.S. dollar refinery will be signed by both the governments during Saudi Crown Prince Mohammed bin Salman’s forthcoming visit to Islamabad in February, Saudi Energy Minister Khalid al-Falih said on Saturday after leading a delegation to the site of the proposed refinery in Gwadar in Pakistan’s southwestern Balochistan province, adds the same Chinese news source.

“Saudi Arabia wants to make Pakistan’s economic development stable through establishing an oil refinery and partnership with Pakistan in the China-Pakistan Economic Corridor,” Falih, who is also chairman of the Board of Saudi Aramco said, adding that Saudi Arabia would also invest in other sectors. The two countries discussed cooperation in refining, petrochemicals, mining and renewable energy, the Saudi news agency SPA reported.

The Saudi engagement in the CPEC could well be taken as the Saudi Arabia’s deep friendship with Pakistan. This help from Riyadh has not only eased the financial crunch of Pakistan but shall allow the Gulf Kingdom also to gain from the CPEC as against the sizeable chunk of investment that SA has already committed.

In a report disseminated from Tehran claims that as many as 700,000 new job opportunities are estimated to be created by 2030 under the ambitious project of China Pakistan Economic Corridor (CPEC).

It is just a matter of a decade or so when the CPEC shall begin to provide jobs to the unemployed Pakistani youths.

Various CPEC projects have thus far provided direct job opportunities to around 75,000 people across the country, according to the Chinese Embassy documents, quoted in various Pakistani newspapers.

A recent study conducted by CPEC Centre of Excellence, Ministry of Planning, Development and Reform of Pakistan showed that indirectly, CPEC could help create even 1.2 million jobs under this project.

In order to promote economic development of Pakistan, Chinese companies also outsourced a large number of projects to local Pakistani companies, said a report in Express Tribune.

This also develops relevant upstream and downstream industries, such as raw material processing and catering industry which also provide more employment opportunities for the local people, the report noted.

In yet another political development, the former US to Pakistan Cameron Munter this Sunday, Karachi, said President Donald Trump and Prime Minister Imran Khan “may find some sort of common ground” if and when a meeting is held between the two leaders.

Addressing an event organized by the Karachi Council on Foreign Relations, the former envoy said Trump and Khan are in power because they both have “very good political sense”.

“They have the fingertip feeling, as we say, they’re very clever with people,” he said while speaking at the event, ‘Brunch & Conversation with Ambassador Cameron Munter’, held at Karachi’s Movenpick Hotel.

Now for the Road: Pakistan by approaching Saudi Arabia for assistance in easing out its financial crunch with the CPEC projects has in many more ways than one done a marvelous job by not identifying itself with China. Excessive reliance on China perhaps will not that be good for Pakistan for several political reasons. That’s all.
