1 minor among 4 booked in rape cases

Ludhiana: As many as four cases of sexual assault were reported in the city on Friday. In the first case, a 14-year-old boy allegedly molested a seven-year-old girl in his neighbourhood.

Father of the minor girl said his daughter had gone to the accused’s house to play, but came back crying. On being asked, she said the accused had molested her.

Investigating officer Harmesh Lal said a case under sections 354 (sexual harassment) of the IPC and Protection of Children from Sexual Offences (Pocso) Act has been registered against the accused. The accused is yet to be arrested.

In another case, police arrested a labourer for allegedly raping a 16-year-old girl of same locality after threatening to kill her younger brother.

The girl said the accused had been stalking her from the past two years. On May 1, when she was on the way to her school, the accused stopped her on the way and asked her to come with him. On refusing, the accused threatened to kill her younger brother after which she agreed to go along. She alleged that he took her to his aunt’s house where he raped her. She added that he raped her again on multiple occasions. She finally narrated her ordeal to her parents who submitted a complaint with police on Friday.

The investigating officer Kiran Lata, said police have lodged an FIR under sections 376 (Rape) and 506 (criminal intimidation) of IPC and Pocso Act against the accused and also arrested him.

In the third case, Model Town police booked a married man, Charanjit Singh Dhillon of Lohara, for raping a 29-year-old woman. In her complaint, the woman said she was in a relationship with the accused for the past nine years. She alleged that her husband left her within a week after getting married as the accused had told him about his relationship with the woman.

The woman added that the accused created ruckus outside her PG and forced her to come with him following which he took her to Doraha. When she asked the accused to marry her, he thrashed her and attempted to rape her. The woman also alleged that the accused had raped her 10 days ago in his car in Model Town.

Investigating officer sub-inspector Jaswinder Singh, said the police have booked the accused under sections 376 (Rape), 323 (voluntarily causing hurt) and 506 (Criminal intimidation) of the IPC. He is yet to be arrested.

In the fourth case, the division number 5 police booked a 20-year-old autodriver for raping a 17-year-old girl of the same locality as his.

The minor alleged that the accused had been stalking her for the past six months. On Friday, the accused stopped her on the way to school and asked her to sit in his auto. On refusing, the accused threatened to kill her father. The accused then took her to a hotel near bus stand and raped after. After returning home, she narrated the entire incident to her parents, who took her to police station for submitting a omplaint.

ASI Tarlochan Singh, who is investigating the case, said that a case under section 376 (Rape) of IPC and POCSO act. The accused is yet to be arrested.



Facebook Twitter Linkedin EMail
