Kodagu administration not taking any chances this time

Officials have drawn up action plans to handle any rain-related emergency

Residents of Kodagu — which was ravaged by landslips and floods last year — are bracing for the south-west monsoon with caution even as the district administration has put in place men and material to cope with any exigency.

After incessant rains resulted in devastating landslips, which cut off the district from the rest of the State, the authorities have drawn up action plans that focuses on rescue and relief with a minimum response time. This is in anticipation of a worst-case scenario.

The district recorded its highest rainfall in over 80 years in 2018. But at a recent meeting in Madikeri, officials from the Karnataka State Disaster Monitoring Centre (KSNDMC) ruled out a recurrence of such heavy rains.

But residents are sceptical of the officials’ claim and there are fears among the locals that the soil is saturated and there could be fresh landslips in case of heavy rains.

These concerns stem from the fact that the district receives an annual rainfall of nearly 2,800 mm with intense rains in July and August.

Hence, Rajkumar Khatri, Principal Secretary to the government, recently conducted a review meeting in the district and the thrust was on identifying vulnerable sections prone to landslips, and to ensure that precautionary measures are in place.

P. Shivaraju, ADC, Kodagu, said the district administration had taken all preparatory measures to handle any exigency arising out of heavy rainfall.

“Eight committees have been constituted and they will look after different aspects of rescue, relief, and rehabilitation,” he added.

After the review of the response, and the measures last year, the authorities constituted an emergency relief response and recovery committee. They also formed early warning and evacuation committee, search and rescue committee, first-aid, mass casualty management committee, shelter management committee. among others.

He said specific groups have been entrusted different aspects of relief, like ensuring nutrition and food in shelters, animal rescue and protection, carcass disposal, and providing psychological counselling etc.

Based on the reports of the Geological Survey of India, vulnerable areas prone to landslips have been identified and retention walls have been strengthened or constructed to prevent or minimise the impact of soil erosion and landslips, said Mr. Shivaraj.

Training has been imparted to the field staff, including the Panchayat Development Officers, on their response in case of a natural calamity.

Meanwhile, the authorities have confirmed that the National Disaster Response Force (NDRF) will deploy a team in the last week of May in Kodagu and it will conduct rescue exercises in areas that were badly affected last year to infuse confidence among the locals.
