Political Economy | Ten messages from the exit polls

If the exit poll results are correct, the BJP will once again form the government. The final seat tally for the ruling coalition is likely to be around the same as in the 2014 elections. But there are crucial differences.

For starters, as many commentators have said, this election has been a referendum on Narendra Modi. Not on his policies, not on any development model, but simply on Modi as a leader, a strong leader. That is an extraordinary development, giving him enormous power.

Second, the BJP fought this election on the issue of nationalism. The Balakot strikes were invoked time and again at election rallies and Modi was seen as the macho man who had the guts to take on Pakistan. Other issues, such as rural distress, the lack of jobs, the impact of demonetisation and the introduction of GST, the slowdown in the economy, don’t seem to have had an impact. This is significant, since it implies nationalism can be effectively used to divert the masses from economic issues, thus easing pressures on redistribution, allowing the government to focus on capital accumulation. These pages have made this point earlier.

Third, the BJP has been able to expand its footprint into new areas, such as West Bengal and Odisha. If these projections are right, then it has become a truly all-India party, unlike in 2014. The days of powerful regional satraps are numbered.

Fourth, the masses have embraced BJP’s Hindutva ideology with gusto. The party’s endorsement of Yogi Adityanath, which so shocked the liberals, as well as putting up Pragya Thakur as its candidate, seems to have had no impact on voters. What used to be the fringe is now mainstream. The party’s programme of a long march through the institutions will now pick up pace.

Fifth, the BJP seems to have succeeded in its long-term objective of consolidating the Hindu vote. This will mean that caste-based parties have reached their sell-by date. It will also mean that minority votes do not matter. But the final word on this will depend on the actual seat position in UP.

Sixth, depending on the final tally of seats, this time the NDA government may soon have a majority in both Houses of Parliament. That will give them a free hand to do pretty much whatever they want to do.

Seventh, it’s likely that the new government will take a hardline stand towards Jammu & Kashmir’s special status.

Eighth, for the business community, an NDA government will mean much-needed continuity in policy. The victory will increase the confidence of the ruling party in pushing through further economic reforms, without the fear of a populist backlash.

Ninth, investors, both domestic and foreign, are also likely to put the money they had on the sidelines to use. The new government, as well as business, will ride a wave of optimism. Whether that optimism founders on the hard rocks of economic reality remains to be seen.

And finally, as I have said before, the Modi government is a fundamental break with the past. Its aim is a radical right-wing revolution—in political economy, in society, in culture. If the exit polls are right, the majority of the Indian masses heartily endorse that revolution. Narendra Modi will now have an even stronger hand to push through his agenda of capitalism with Hindutva characteristics.
