Delhi Metro to Introduce Electric Scooters

Representative image

Delhi Metro Rail Corporation is drawing up plans to introduce e-scooters at five of its stations in the national capital, joining the country's push for cleaner mobility. In addition to that, DMRC also intends to significantly promote public bicycle-sharing services from its stations as part of its focus on providing eco-friendly last-mile connectivity options, reported ETAuto. DMRC will set up bicycle stands at Metro stations in Delhi that will feature either dock-less cycle sharing services or a completely automated docking system. Folks interested in using these services will be able to unlock bicycles parked at these stands via QR codes generated on the mobile apps meant for these services.

While the corporation will provide rent-free space for cycle stands at the stations in addition to the facility to charge e-scooters, they will be managed by private operators.

Also read: Ather 450 E-Scooter Approved for FAME II Subsidy

It must be noted that bicycle-sharing services are actually already available at 19 Delhi Metro stations, but now DMRC says it will now expand them in a 'bigger' manner. Furthermore, metro stations that already have this cycle-sharing service, DMRC will now offer e-scooters as well. The corporation will first introduce electric scooters at stations like Mandi House, Durgabai Deshmukh South Campus, Dwarka Sector 9, and Nehru Enclave since that get a significant footfall of young commuters. But be warned, the e-scooters at Delhi Metro stations will cost a bit more as compared to bicycles, with charges starting at Re 1 per kilometre.

DMRC will fit the e-scooters with GPS so as to calculate the total kilometres travelled. Furthermore, people who wish to ride the electric scooters at DMRC stations will be required to hand over an ID proof to the service operator.

DMRC opines that the provision of bicycle sharing services at metro stations will help reduce the reliance on cars and other vehicles, thus lightening emissions as well as moderating traffic jams in the city.
