International Fleet Review Current Affairs, GK & News

International Fleet Review Current Affairs, GK & News

Visakhapatnam, the City of Destiny, is getting ready to host the International Naval event `MILAN’ in March 2020, after successfully hosting the International Fleet Review (IFR) in February 2016. The Chief of Staff of the Eastern Naval Command, Vice Admiral Satish Namdeo Ghormade reviewed the preparation for the mega event on Tuesday, 7th January 2020. ..

Month: Current Affairs - January, 2020

Topics: Eastern Naval Command • International Fleet Review • Milan 2020 • naval exercise • Visakhapatnam

After the completion of naval exercise IMDEX-19 recetly, the Kolkata Class Destroyers Indian Naval ships namely INS Kolkata and INS Shakti are participating in SIMBEX-2019. Key Highlights About: SIMBEX (Singapore India Maritime Bilateral Exercise) is an annual bilateral naval exercise between India and Singapore. It is being held from 16 May to 22 May 2019. ..

Month: Current Affairs - May, 2019

Category: Defence Current Affairs

Topics: ADMM-PLUS MS FTX • Fokker-50 (F-50) • IMDEX-19 • INS Kolkata • INS Shakti • International Fleet Review • Kolkata Class Destroyers • Poseidon-8I (P8I) • RSN Steadfast • RSN Valiant • SIMBEX-19 • Singapore India Maritime Bilateral Exercise • South-East Asia

Indian Navy warships INS Kolkata and tanker INS Shakti will take part in the Chinese international fleet review to be held at Qingdao on April 23. The International Fleet Review is being held by China to commemorate the 70th Anniversary of the People’s Liberation Army’s Navy. More than 60 countries are expected to join the ..

Month: Current Affairs - April, 2019

Topics: China • Indian Navy • Indian Navy Ships • INS Kolkata • INS Shakti • International Fleet Review • Qingdao • Visakhapatnam

The International Fleet Review (IFR) 2016, an international military exercise hosted and conducted by Indian Navy was inaugurated in Visakhapatnam, Andhra Pradesh. Theme of this edition on IFR is “United through Oceans” and its objective is to enhance mutual trust and confidence with neighbouring navies by inviting their ships to participate in the event. Key ..

Month: Current Affairs - February, 2016

Topics: Current Affairs 2016 • Defence • Indian Military Exercises • Indian Navy • International Fleet Review • Military exercise
