Custodial Disappearance: Informer arrested, family demands action against BSF officer – KashmirWatch

CNS eports from Indian occupied Kashmir



Srinagar, May 20, CNS: A family from Hazratbal Srinagar Monday demanded that besides the Informer, a BSF officer responsible for the disappearance and death of their loved one in 1992 should also be arrested without any delay.

The fugitive Informer of BSF whom police identified as Azad Mir alias Asghar was recently arrested by Crime Branch Kashmir after 27 years from Muzafarpur Bihar.

Police Station Nigeen had registered an FIR vide number 44/1992 under section 302, 344, 364,348, 201, 109, 102B RPC against one Azad Mir alias Asghar son of Muhammad Sultan, a resident of Nigeen Srinagar after a complaint was filed by one Fayaz Ahmed Bazaz of Hazratbal who in his complaint accused Azad Mir of killing his brother Sajad Ahmed with the help of Deputy Commandant 30 Battalion BSF DS Rathore.

BSF officer Rathor during a night raid picked up deceased Sajad Ahmed Bazaz on the instruction of their dreaded Informer Asghar on February 12, 1992, family told news agency CNS. “The High Court taking cognizance of the petition filed by us appointed a Commissioner to investigate the case who held BSF officer DS Rathore responsible for custodial disappearance, however, despite the accused officer being identified by the aged father of the deceased son, the Home Ministry of India didn’t grant any sanction to prosecute DS Rathore.”

The then SHO Police Station Nigeen issued a certificate to Ghulam Muhammad Bazaz, the father of slain Sajad Ahmed Bazaz confirming the arrest and subsequent disappearance of Sajad.

When the accused fled from Kashmir the case was handed over to Crime Branch. The Crime Branch Kashmir too failed to nab the accused despite making hard efforts, however, recently it managed to arrest the absconder from Muzaffarpur Bihar. The accused was produced before the Court where on the directions of Court he was sent to Central Jail Srinagar.

The family demanded that action should also be initiated against the BSF officer. They said that both BSF officer this dreaded informer are involved in many custodial disappearance cases. (CNS)
