‘My father often got threats from criminals’

Says daughter of victim; sub-inspector’s friend of 29 years says he fled spot as he was scared of the accused

Rajni Rajput, second daughter of sub-inspector Raj Kumar, was scheduled to begin her first day at her first job in Noida, instead she had to go to the morgue to receive her father’s body.

The 58-year-old Delhi Police officer died after allegedly being attacked by a bootlegger in Shahdara’s Vivek Vihar on Sunday night. Vijay alias Bhuri was illegally selling liquor to a man when the victim allegedly started filming the act.

Following this, a brawl broke out between the two and the accused thrashed the officer. Kumar, survived by wife and three daughters, was declared brought dead at a hospital.

Kumar’s oldest daughter got married two years ago while his second daughter works as a clerk in a PSU. His third daughter is pursuing M.A. from Delhi University.

His younger daughter Vaishali Rajput said her father did not have enmity with anyone in the area.

“My father was killed because he was a policeman. People involved in drugs and liquor trade in the area used to blame my father for any police action against them. They even blamed him for stopping them from playing loudspeaker in the area. A few days back, a Residents’ Welfare Association member had warned my dad of attack by a bootlegger,” she said.

The incident took place in Kasturba Nagar, which is infamous for sale of illegal drug and liquor. Long ago, a police post was erected in the area to stop the menace.

A local clinic near where the incident took place has been shut ever since. L.K. Verma said that Kumar had been his friend for 29 years. He said he was in his clinic with Kumar when the fight started.

“I wish I could have saved him but no one dares to stand up against Vijay. When the fight broke out, I shut the clinic and went home as I did not want Vijay to see me,” said Dr. Verma.

Locals tight-lipped

Only a few locals spoke to The Hindu about the incident while others either said they were not present at the spot or denied having any knowledge.

A resident, who did not wish to be named, said: “Alcoholics bang at our doors at night everyday in search of liquor. The area has become a den for bootleggers. We cannot keep our daughters alone at home.”

“No one will speak as they are scared of Vijay. He always boasted of getting out of jail. The locals feel the policemen are hand in glove with the criminals,” said a woman. Vijay is a registered history-sheeter.

He has 21 criminal cases registered against him in various police stations across the city, the police said.
