Andhra Pradesh CM Chandrababu Naidu unfazed after NDA's sunny forecast

Unfazed by exit poll predictions of a comfortable win for the BJP led NDA, Andhra Pradesh chief minister Chandrababu Naidu is keeping the hope afloat in the opposition camp. On Monday, he met West Bengal chief minister Mamata Banerjee and also Sharad Yadav (erstwhile President of JDU who is fighting election on RJD ticket).

Though Naidu did not speak on the contents of the meeting, he said he has invited Mamata to come to Delhi to be part of the delegation going to meet the Election Commission over concerns regarding electronic voting machines (EVMs). Naidu is trying to bring all opposition parties on board for a post poll alliance, a step in advance to bolster opposition stake to form the government if the results give a fractured mandate.

In the past three days, Naidu has met several opposition leaders, including BSP supremo Mayawati, SP chief Akhilesh Yadav, UPA chairperson Sonia Gandhi, Congress president Rahul Gandhi and NCP chief Sharad Pawar. The effort is bring all opposition parties on a single platform on the day of results and not let the opportunity go if numbers don't give BJP led NDA a clear mandate.

Incidentally, Vice President Venkaiah Naidu, a former cabinet minister in Modi government, has also cautioned people not to believe in exit polls and wait for the results.

An interesting aspect to observe remains whether Mayawati will be in Delhi or not. She changed her plans to meet Sonia Gandhi on Monday after exit poll results showed clear NDA sweep.

Naidu will also lead a delegation of leaders from at least ten opposition parties to the Election Commission to seek fool proof security arrangements of VVPAT and EVMs. Though returned unceremoniously by the Supreme Court, the opposition parties are expected to reiterate their demand for counting of 50 percent VVPAT slips with corresponding EVMs.

"Now we are asking -- if there is any discrepancy then you have to go for total counting of that assembly segment. Why you are delaying? Why you are avoiding?"Naidu said.
