India can sell sarees in Germany, we can sell cars here: German envoy ahead of Angela Merkel's visit

German Chancellor Angela Merkel will be visiting India for the biennial summit level meeting this autumn; Germany's new ambassador to India Walter J Lindner confirmed that to India Today TV.

"Chancellor Merkel will come [to Indi] this autumn. Don't know whether it will be October or November. It is a biennial thing that we do when the two governments come together and have a summit-level meeting where we discuss all aspects of our ties," Walter J Lindner said after presenting his credentials to President Ram Nath Kovind on Tuesday.

Chancellor Merkel will make a big push to fight climate change, one of the biggest global challenges.

Merkel will come with an entourage of cabinet ministers.

ENVIRONMENT

Both sides will discuss collaboration in the spheres of artificial intelligence, modernisation, future working conditions, safety of the planet, global warming, development and economic aspects.

"Climate change is a very important subject. It will impact the whole of mankind. In India, pollution of River Ganga, pollution of the air, scarcity of water and other natural resources and more deserts than agricultural land are the great challenges and are being faced by people across the world," Walter J Lindner said.

ECONOMICS

On economic front, Walter J Lindner said, "We have more than $20 billion worth of goods and business between the two countries but there is room for more. We want to sell more cars here and if you want to sell more sarees in Germany then go ahead. We should find ways to better the situation."

SECURITY

Germany and India will also focus on security aspects where fighting terrorism would be paramount feature.

"Germany and India have been victims of terrorist attacks. We have to do everything to eliminate this menace from the face of the planet. All this can't be done by one or two nations, we have to do this internationally. We need strong partners and India is a strong partner," Walter J Lindner. said.

India and Germany have been important partners of Afghanistan.

The recent decision of the US to pullout its troops from Afghanistan have been a concern for all the stakeholders in the region since the is yet to find peace and stability.

While the German envoy concurred that troop withdrawal is an eventuality, it cannot be done in haste.

"In the long run, a pullout is natural because Afghans should take their fate into their own hands, but anything that is hasty is not good. US former president Obama had started with this idea and President Trump is saying the same thing. But, there is no official line which says that they are pulling out. It will take time," J Walter Lindner said.

India and the European nations have also been keeping a keen eye on the developments on the US-Iran front.

With the US tightening its noose around Iran's neck and with Tehran's recent threat of reviewing its deal with the P5+1 after US withdrawal, Germany is hoping that better sense will prevail.

Warning of a nuclear arms race, the German envoy said, "We should avoid anything which raises tensions. Now, JCPOA [Joint Comprehensive Plan of Action] is an agreement to limit the accessibility of Iran to nuclear weapons. It was a cornerstone of nuclear security and peace in the region. If you remove that then the danger is that we have a nuclear arms race in the region and that would not be useful for anyone. That is why we are talking about how can we convince the Iranians to stay in the agreement. They need some economic benefits for which we have set up a financing mechanism which is still in an infant stage but might be useful."
