Lok Sabha polls will be fought under my leadership, says Madan Lal Saini

Amid talks of a possible change of guard in the state BJP, the party president insisted that the upcoming general elections in Rajasthan would be fought under his direction. State BJP president Madan Lal Saini, who was in Jodhpur on Wednesday, said the Lok Sabha elections 2019 will be contested with him at the helm of affairs. “The BJP will fight the elections in Rajasthan under my leadership,” he told media persons.

Earlier in a meeting of the party functionaries, he said the Congress has come to power riding on false promises made in the assembly elections. The workers should gear up for the upcoming polls and the public will teach the Congress a lesson for not being true to them, he said. Saini was addressing office bearers and workers in Jodhpur on Wednesday.

Saini’s statement comes at a time when there are talks of party looking to replace the BJP brass in state ahead of the general elections in May this year. The BJP lost the elections to the state Vidhan Sabha conducted in December last year. The party managed to win 73 of the 199 it contested, while the Congress which came up with 99 seats went on to form the government in state with its pre-poll allies and the Bahujan Samajwadi Party legislators.

The loss in the state happened under the leadership of Saini who was brought in as a consensus candidate for the post of BJP president in Rajasthan weeks before the election. The BJP state president’s post was lying vacant for several months after the departure of Raje loyalist and then Jaipur legislator Ashok Parnami. Saini stepped in after the Raje camp did not endorse union minister Gajendra Singh Shekhawat, who is widely believed to be party’s national president Amit Shah’s choice, as Parnami’s replacement.

There are 25 parliamentary seats in the state, the party having one every single one of them in the 2014 elections. The BJP, however, lost 2 seats in the bypolls bringing down their tally to 23 and leaving Congress with 2 seats.

The poor show in assembly polls and disappointing results from Jaipur is what has led the party to mull a replacement for Saini, sources said.

In Jodhpur, Saini said, the selection of candidates in the Lok Sabha elections will be based on the feedback of the workers. The election management committee will decide on new faces, he said.

Saini Speak

While speaking on his party’s defeat in the Assembly elections, state BJP chief Saini said the workers have not given up. “It is a respectable position having competed with the Congress,” he said.
