AICTE approves all seats for UVCE

UVCE

AICTE

K-CET

Rs 53 cr to be released soon



Approved UG seats by AICTE for 2019-20 admissions

State promises help with faculty shortage and infrastructure faceliftMuch to the relief of University Visvesvaraya College of Engineering (), the All India Council of Technical Education () has revoked reducing 10 per cent intake of seats from next academic year.The UVCE will now retain 550 under-graduate (UG) seats and 350 post-graduate (PG) seats for the academic year 2019-20. The college, which is still crippling from a shortage of faculty and infrastructure, was rattled when AICTE warned them of reducing the intake of students by 10 per cent from the academic year 2019-20.However, the State Higher Education department has woken up to the long-pending crisis and promised the Council that it will fill up the vacant faculty positions by end of August.Officials have cited the State government’s assurance to retain the number of seats at AICTE. Students will be admitted through the Karnataka Common Entrance Test () which is scheduled to take place in the month of June.Speaking to BM, Professor Venugopal KR, vice-chancellor of BU said, “AICTE has allowed all government colleges to take admissions as per the sanctioned seats. The State government of Karnataka has also agreed to fill up the faculty positions. Therefore, UVCE will not lose any seats in the next year admissions.”He added, “We have 550 UG seats across the streams and 350 seats for PG courses, all this will be retained.”A senior official from UVCE said, “Out of 175 faculty positions we have got an approval for 97. Out of which, four of them have retired this year. So we currently have only 93 working faculty members. The State government of Karnataka has promised to fill up other 77 faculty positions by the end of August this year. We have uploaded all the details including the placement details as per AICTE directions.”Regarding the infrastructure of UVCE, the official said, “With Rs 25 crores sanctioned by the state, renovations are underway. The government has agreed to release Rs 53 crores more for the construction of mechanical block and other facilities. We have also received Rs two crores from the UVCE Foundation and others which will also be used at working towards infrastructure. We have also created a separate account for funds where our alumni members are contributing.” UVCE is expecting to complete its renovation work by end of August.Architecture / 40Civil Engineering / 120Computer Science and Engineering / 70Electrical and Electronics Engineering / 80Electronics and Communications Engineering / 60Information Science and Engineering / 60Mechanical Engineering / 100
