Arunachal attack: After MLA Tirong Aboh's killing, Congress leader asks 'Was India misled over Naga treaty?'

File picture: Arunachal Pradesh MLA Tirong Aboh | Photo Credit: IANS

Guwahati: After the killing of at least 11 persons, including Arunachal Pradesh MLA Tirong Aboh, in an ambush by suspected Naga militants in Tirap district of Arunachal Pradesh on Tuesday, leaders have started playing politics over the ghastly incident.

Aboh and his family members were en route to Khonsa from Assam’s Dibrugarh when their vehicle was ambushed by suspected National Socialist Council of Nagalim-Isak-Muivah [NSCN(IM)] militants at Bogapani in Tirap district, located on Assam-Arunachal Pradesh border. The deceased included Aboh’s minor son, some of his relatives and two personal security officers.

Taking to Twitter, Congress leader Ahmed Patel asked:

“In 2015 the BJP announced a Naga Accord with the NSCN(IM). Today they are blaming the NSCN(IM) for the Arunachal Terror attack .. so was there ever an accord or was the nation misled ?”

Notably, the Indian government and the NSCN(IM) had in August 2015 signed a ‘Framework Agreement’ in a bid to resolve the Naga conflict. "However, the views of various stakeholders remain fragmented as the details of the agreement have not been disclosed in the public domain," mentioned Pradeep Singh Chhonkar, the Research Fellow at Institute for Defence Studies and Analysis, in the research piece titled 'The Quest for Nagalim: Fault Lines and Challenges' published in 2018.

Aboh, a sitting National People's Party (NPP) MLA from Khonsa West Assembly constituency of Arunachal Pradesh, was seeking re-election from the seat in the recently-held Assembly elections. As per reports, Aboh had received threats from the NSCN (IM) militants over this.

In the wake of the tragedy, the Army launched a huge operation in and around Khonsa in Arunachal Pradesh to arrest the culprits behind the killing.

"The government has also rushed the DIG (Eastern range), IGP (Law and Order) and the SPs of both Tirap and Changlang districts to the place of occurrence to coordinate the operation," a senior police official in Itanagar said.

The incident was condemned by Union Home Minister Rajnath Singh, Minister of State for Home Kiren Rijiju, among others.

"I'm shocked and saddened by the brutal attack and tragic killing of MLA Shri Tirong Aboh of Arunachal Pradesh, his family including 11 people. Strongest possible action will be taken against those responsible for such dastardly attack," Rijiju had tweeted.

Arunachal Pradesh Chief Minister Pema Khandu also expressed anguish and shock over the incident and assured that befitting action would be taken against the perpetrators.
