5 reasons why investors should trade cautiously till final Lok Sabha election results

The stock market on Tuesday cooled off after rising generously following multiple exit poll predictions which indicated that the Narendra Modi-led NDA government will return to power.

Traders on D-Street were optimistic about the outcome presented by exit polls, but brokerages have asked all share market investors to trade cautiously till the final Lok Sabha elections are declared.

Having said that, here are 5 factors why investors should proceed with caution while trading:

Volatility to remain high

The India VIX, which is also known as the fear gauge or volatility index shot up yet again by 9.23 per cent to 25.65 at Tuesday's closing. After touching record highs in early trade, both S&P BSE Sensex and NSE Nifty trimmed gains in a volatile afternoon session. Sensex ended 383 points lower at 38,970 points while Nifty ended 119 points lower at 11,709.10. Since volatility has gone up before the polls, brokerage firms have asked traders to proceed with caution.

Profit taking

Many brokerages had warned on Monday about profit taking on Tuesday after the markets enjoyed its best 1-day bull run in several years. Profit taking is defined as the act of selling a security/equity in order to lock gains after it has risen appreciably. So, when there is an unexpected decline in a particular stock or equity index, it is often attributed to many investors booking profits. Many analysts explained that over-the-top market reaction to the exit polls led to profit booking on Tuesday and it is expected to rise till the final results are out on Thursday.

Markets unstable

There is a lot of instability in the market at present as the exit polls are just indicators of the final Lok Sabha elections outcome. Many brokerage firms predict the stock market to act volatile on Wednesday as well and asked traders to not get tempted and buy stocks at a bargain when they dip. Traders have also been advised not to have an aggressive approach before the market comes to grip with the final election results.

Economic slowdown

While brokerages are not worried about the knee-jerk reaction expected after the final results are declared, they are concerned about a slowdown in economic growth, triggered by weak company earnings for the last quarter and weakening macroeconomic data. Even if the NDA government returns to power, analysts do not expect a spike in economic activity as the government would initially focus on fiscal consolidation. Meanwhile, approximately 3 per cent earnings downgrade for over 36 companies and weak management commentaries have failed to positively impact their stocks on the market.

Global factors

Last but not the least, tension emanating from the ongoing trade tussle between the US and China has added to volatility observed in global stock markets including India. Many Indian IT and Pharma stocks are currently suffering due to a spurt in global trade tensions.
