PMC staff caught warning vendors to evade their squad

‘PAKHRANO UDA, PINZRA YETOY’



The issue of encroachments on city roads and footpaths has raged for years, with frequent crackdowns and grand plans to segregate them out of the way yielding naught. As a result, they continue to cause traffic problems, pedestrian troubles and overall inconveniences to citizens.Shockingly now, a ‘sting’ conducted by a young city corporator has revealed that a huge part of this problem may have been the fact that some members of the Pune Municipal Corporation (PMC) anti-encroachment squad have themselves been warning hawkers to get out of the way when a drive was about to reach their area, thus helping them evade action.This nexus was unveiled in the first week of January by Bharatiya Janata Party (BJP) corporator Shweta Mahesh Khose-Galande of the Viman Nagar-Vadgaonsheri ward, after she managed to clandestinely collect proof of antiencroachment staffers talking in code words to hawkers before their squad reached the spot.Soon after, when she approached the municipal commissioner with evidence, an overhaul of the department’s entire working was put into action as of this week — going ahead, a squad from another zone will take action on hawkers in different areas each time, making it tough to forewarn offenders.~~67563972~~Officials hope that completely changing the existing policy will help curb the modus operandi of leaking information, and limit the number of encroachments within the city.Elaborating on what led her to this revelation, Khose-Galande narrated to Mirror, “We were first alerted by a hawker on Nagar Road just last week that the PMC anti-encroachment squad took action only against him — other hawkers around him managed to flee before the drive even began. This made me very curious. I immediately decided to visit the Kharadi Bypass, where hawkers have occupied a major portion of the road, knowing that action was in the offing. I saw that two men were suspiciously talking to hawkers in some sort of code. They were saying: ‘Pakhrano uda, pinzra yetoy’ (Fly birds, the cage is coming). Hearing this, the hawkers immediately began to disappear from the scene.”The 27-year-old added, “I felt this was obviously an allusion to flee before the squad arrives — and my doubts were confirmed when the squad landed up to take action, and I saw the same two men in the team! I had recorded proof, with an audio note and videos, and immediately submitted a complaint to the civic chief along with the evidence, requesting him to take immediate steps for redressal.”Commenting on the changes made to the policies thereafter, she said, “We are only happy that some effort has been taken to eliminate this nexus.”Quizzed by Mirror, PMC anti-encroachment department head and deputy commissioner Madhav Jagtap admitted to the discrepancies in their efforts. “There are instances of squads belonging to a ward office being reluctant to act against hawkers in their own area — because of pressure from local corporators and other influential people, officials face inertia. Sometimes, messages are passed ahead before the arrival of a squad. In future, action will be taken against illegal hawkers in a given area by staffers of another zone. Furthermore, this allocation will be finalised only last minute, and it will keep on changing so that there is no scope for any nexus in the future,” he said, asserting that because of the same covert network, officers of the anti-encroachment department have even faced murderous attacks in the past.As per Jagtap, these alterations are already yielding results. “On the very first day of the new strategy on Tuesday, we demolished an encroachment near SNDT College, which falls under the Warje-Karve Nagar ward — and, we had deployed a team from the Ghole Road ward to accomplish the same,” he said.Similarly, assistant municipal commissioner Rajesh Bankar of Nagar Road ward affirmed another success, saying, “A drive on Wednesday, held in front of the Dorabjee Mall at Viman Nagar, had a squad from Kothrud involved. Earlier, we had also received plaints about unsuccessful drives due to the involvement of some of our own employees. But now, which squad acts will be decided by the central department, leaving no room for anyone to exert influence. This fresh decision will certainly break the vicious circle.”
