Varanasi (Uttar Pradesh) Election 2019: Will five-time MLA Ajay Rai give PM Modi stiff competition for seat?

A file picture of PM Narendra Modi | Photo Credit: PTI

Lucknow: The Varanasi Lok Sabha seat will go to polls on May 19 in the seventh and the last phase of the 2019 general elections. Prime Minister Narendra Modi will once again contest for the seat from the Bharatiya Janata Party (BJP). While there was a buzz about Congress fielding Priyanka Gandhi Vadra to take on Prime Minister Narendra Modi from the seat, it is Ajay Rai who will finally fight the seat for the party. Former BSF officer Tej Bahadur Yadav's nomination was dismissed by the Election Commission for on the ground that he did not submit a proper reason for his dismissal by the BSF. Shalini Yadav will be contesting for the seat for the Samajwadi Party and Ateeq Ahmad would contest as an Independent candidate.

Varanasi is one of the 80 seats from the state of Uttar Pradesh in the lower house of Parliament. The constituency is divided into five Assembly segments.

In 2014, Narendra Modi as the prime ministerial candidate of the BJP had fought from the Varanasi seat and secured it by a winning margin of 3,71,784 or 36.1 per cent votes defeating Aam Aadmi Party convenor Arvind Kejriwal, who finished second.

The BJP this time is facing a stiff fight from the Mahagathbandhan, underwhich the two regional bigwigs -- Samajwadi Party and the Bahujan Samaj Party -- along with Ajit Singh's Rashtriya Lok Dal have come together. While the Mahagathbandhan hopes that alliance arithmetic works in its favor, the BJP is banking on PM Modi's charisma and his popularity to put up a good performance in the state this time. In 2014, the BJP, under the leadership of PM Modi, had decimated the Opposition and secured 73 out of the total of 80 seats in the state.

The PM, who is seeking a second term from Varanasi, will depend heavily on UP to get a full majority in Lok Sabha this time. The poll results will be out on May 23.
