AAP writes to Speaker; Khaira set to be disqualified as MLA

editorial@tribune.com

Ruchika M Khanna

Tribune News Service

Chandigarh, January 16

On a day when the third MLA of the Aam Aadmi Party (AAP) Baldev Singh, representing Jaito Assembly segment, resigned from the party’s primary membership, the top brass swung into action to save AAP from further “political erosion”.

The party, after its core committee meeting, today sent a letter to Vidhan Sabha Speaker Rana KP, saying that Sukhpal Singh Khaira had resigned from the party. Leader of Opposition Harpal Singh Cheema handed over the letter to the Speaker. With this, the disqualification of Khaira as MLA from Bholath in the Vidhan Sabha becomes inevitable.

Bhagwant Mann, AAP MP, who is also part of the core committee, told The Tribune that the decision to send the letter to the Speaker was taken in the meeting late this evening and endorsed by the Political Affairs Committee of AAP in Delhi and national convenor Arvind Kejriwal.

Crushing the surging rebellion in the party became necessary as the third resignation of AAP MLA from the party will bring down their number in the House to 17.

HS Phoolka, though not part of the rebel group led by Khaira, had resigned on January 3, citing differences in ideology with the party. Khaira, who has the support of six other MLAs, had resigned on January 6. He floated his own party last week and the rebel MLAs, Kanwar Sandhu (under suspension), Jagtar Singh Jagga, Nazar Singh Manshahia, Jagdev Singh Kamalu and Pirmal Singh, besides Baldev Singh, were present at the party launch function. Sources in AAP say that these MLAs are still in two minds about resigning from the party.

The Shiromani Akali Dal and the BJP, too, jointly have 17 MLAs (14 of the Akali Dal and three of the BJP). With both Opposition parties having similar number of MLAs (provided the three above mentioned MLAs are disqualified), the SAD-BJP, too, can stake claim to the post of Leader of Opposition.

Probably sensing this, the AAP leadership has taken action only against Sukhpal Khaira. The move is meant to stem the rebellion, as other rebels would not like to give up their Vidhan Sabha membership and force byelections in their segments.

May trigger election to LoP post
