IRAN THREAT: Pentagon officials vow to send HUGE wave of troops to Middle East

US stance on Iran is 'not for war' says defence secretary

top stories direct to your inbox SUBSCRIBE Invalid email Sign up to receive our rundown of the day'sdirect to your inbox We use your sign-up to provide content in ways you've consented to and to improve our understanding of you. This may include adverts from us and 3rd parties based on our understanding. You can unsubscribe at any time. More info

US officials have confirmed that they will consider sending an extra 10,000 troops to the region. No decision has been made and it is so far unsure whether officials will approve the proposal. With tensions continuing to simmer between the countries, US officials have insisted that the move would only be to bolster defensive forces in the region.

The news comes as Donald Trump had tweeted on Sunday: "If Iran wants to fight, that will be the official end of Iran." Despite that remark, defence officials also insisted to Congress that the US does not want to go to war with Iran. With both Trump and National Security Advisor John Bolton both advocating a strong stance to the Islamic Republic, acting Defence Secretary Patrick Shanahan tried to reduce escalations between the two countries. Mr Shanahan said: "I think our steps were very prudent and we've put on hold the potential for attacks on Americans and that's what's extremely important. READ MORE: Iran war: Will Iran and USA go to war?

World war 3: US plans to send more troops to the Middle East

World war 3: Defence Secretary Patrick Shanahan tried to defuse tensions

"I just hope Iran is listening. "We're in the region to address many things, but it's not to go to war with Iran." Moreover, a Pentagon official, Rebecca Rebarich stated: "As a matter of longstanding policy, we are not going to discuss or speculate on potential future plans and requests for forces." On Sunday, the US military carried out exercises in the Arabian Sea to show Washinton's strength in the region. READ MORE: Foreign Office warns Britons AGAINST travel to Iran

World war 3: Iran-US tensions have soared over the last year

USA: Iran sanctioned for "ballistic missile program" by US
