Mandate 2019 is for Modi 2.0 to deliver on unfulfilled promises

Work towards greater presence

Another chance to deliver growth

Addressing economic issues vital

The 2019 election verdict came in stronger than the average of exit polls, with the NDA tally aggregating at 337 seats (as of 1630 hours IST), which resoundingly paved the way for Modi govt 2.0.Within this, the BJP has improved its tally from 2014. The UPA tally is up only 30 seats at 95 seats, largely contributed by the Congress (up 12 seats at 56) and DMK (22, +22). The non-aligned parties’ tally fell to 110 seats (-15) mainly because of a loss of 10 seats by TMC in West Bengal and a few others by smaller parties.These are not the final numbers yet, but the mandate of the 2019 is clearly been in favour of the NDA, and it is an endorsement of the party’s economic and social policies. The numbers were in stark contrast to the much weaker performance I was expecting. The outcome is in contrast to the outcome of recent state elections, which reflected ground-level stress of various kinds. Clearly, the initiatives taken by the Modi government over the past three-four months to drive the sentiment in its favour delivered results.At a broad level, NDA’s losses in UP (at 58 seats, -14) were mostly matched by gains in West Bengal (+16). This implies the BJP and its allies have retained their strength in other states despite the exclusion of TDP.What does this poll result mean for the market?The market has already responded with renewed exuberance; Nifty and Sensex touched their lifetime highs at 12,000 and 40,000, respectively, on Thursday, up 8 per cent from mid-May lows. The midcap and smallcap indices have underperformed with a rebound of 6-odd per cent.From the flows standpoint, the impact of a pro-BJP and pro-NDA outcome has been supported by FII net purchases, which have turned positive since mid-May. DIIs were the key buyers prior to that.Notwithstanding the recent volatility, the market is trading at rich valuation, with Nifty at 26-27 times its 12-month trailing earnings. While the Midcap and Smallcap indices have seen steep corrections since January 2018, the flow of discretionary money has not been so positive.Hence, if the positivity of the election outcome has to sustain, domestic discretionary flows have to revive the way it did post 2014 general election . The outlook for FII flows will be a function also of global factors. It is possible that they may take a positive stance on the reinstatement of Modi 2.0 government, at least in the near term.Beyond the initial exuberance, the market will look for a clear direction from the government on how it plans to tackle complicated economic issues. A proactive articulation of policy blueprint will be crucial for a convincing break-away from the sub-optimal growth path that the Modi government delivered in its first tenure. Mandate 2019 reflects that the electorate has pardoned non-delivery on various promises, assuming that Modi will be able to deliver them in the next term.Here are some outcomes I will be looking put for from the Modi govt 2.0:In the post-poll scenario, Modi’s dominance within the NDA government will get further reinforced. Modi govt 2.0 will try to further strengthen is political presence across India. The next potential move will be to establish is governments in Karnataka and Madhya Pradesh and simultaneously gain power in West Bengal by leveraging the success of 2019.Mandate 2019 indicates that people have chosen to overlook the impact of demonetisation, dislocation from GST implementation and lack of solid economic reforms that the country requires to achieve higher growth. With the second term, it is hoped that Modi govt 2.0 will be able to articulate a cogent blueprint of reforms that can enable the economy to get out of the prevailing low growth trajectory. The next full budget should articulate the sense of a big leap forward in this direction.Lack of a strong ministerial team, under-representation of expertise and weakening of institutions were major concern for Modi govt 1.0. Now with the mandate for a second term, it is hoped that steps will be taken to address these issues as well.It will be imperative for Modi regime 2.0 to address the complicated combination of farm sector distress, slow exports, moderation in manufacturing activities, lack of private investments, a steep rise unemployment, problems in SME and NBFC sectors, weak global trade and considerable lack of fiscal space.One important factor behind the success of Modi govt 1.0 could be the use of Jan-Dhan accounts and Aadhar linkage to deliver various entitlements. Other schemes such as PM Kisan, Swachha Bharat, Ujjwala scheme, Power for All, Housing for All may also have helped. Hence, one can expect the Modi govt 2.0 to reinforce work in this direction.Sustenance of social development programs have to be dependent on revival of private sector investment, profitability and resuscitation of banking & non-banking sectors, which are currently in stress. Over the past five years, average growth in corporate earnings has been very modest at 3-4%. This is unlikely to get significantly better anytime soon.Overall, the reinstatement of the Modi government has revived hopes of growth revival as it did after the 2014 election. Given the fact that economic conditions have got more complicated, we should look for a set of comprehensive reform measures to deliver sustainable growth.From the market standpoint, formation of Modi govt 2.0 is seen as positive. But looking beyond the near-term euphoria, corporate earnings revival will become crucial. Stock valuations today are 55 per cent more than what they had prior to the 2014 election (Nifty’s trailing multiple in April 2014 was at 18-19 times 12-month trailing earnings).
