BJP’s Pakistan conundrum

There have been substantive changes in the style, substance and conduct of India’s foreign policy since Narendra Modi became Prime Minister in 2014. Relations with global centres of power, notably the US, Russia, China, France and the European Union were strengthened. There was a carefully crafted policy to reach out across our Indian Ocean neighbourhood to countries like Indonesia, Bangladesh and Myanmar to our east, and to the UAE, Saudi Arabia and Seychelles to our west. Relations with China have significantly improved after the Modi-Xi Jinping summit in Wuhan, while sorting out border tensions in Doklam.

The recent general election was dominated by continuing attention on the Balakot air strike. The air strike made it clear that if provoked, India reserved the right to strike at terrorist bases, beyond its borders. The prime minister subsequently made it clear that we would not be deterred by threats of nuclear escalation by Pakistan. This was the first time an Indian leader had called Pakistan’s ‘nuclear bluff’. Pakistan’s response to the Balakot attack, not surprisingly, did not go beyond sending fighter aircraft, which did not cross the international border. The international diplomatic response was, however, remarkably positive. Despite Chinese objections, the US, France and the UK proposed a UN Security Council resolution declaring Masood Azhar as an international terrorist. The proposed resolution had the backing of all UNSC members, except China. Beijing, however, soon fell in line. We have never in the past received such overwhelming support internationally, on a crucial issue of national security.

Prime Minister Imran Khan has made regular references to dialogue with India, primarily to resolve what he calls the “Kashmir dispute”. Imran himself has been a protege of the military establishment for decades. He is presently guided by the army not just on security issues, but even on Cabinet appointments and in foreign policy – notably on relations with India, the US, Russia, China, Iran and oil rich Arab states like the UAE and Saudi Arabia. The recent Cabinet changes in Islamabad bear the stamp of the army. The new interior (home) minister, Brigadier Ijaz Shah, is a former intelligence official, who arranged accommodation for Osama bin Laden in the cantonment town of Abbottabad. Shah also assisted Omar Syed Sheikh, a terrorist arrested for the murder of Wall Street Journal correspondent Daniel Pearl.

Facing attacks from across its borders with Iran and Afghanistan, Pakistan is now confronted with multiple security problems. Iran responded harshly to cross-border terrorist attacks by Sunni extremists from Pakistan by a lethal cross-border attack on Pakistan. Meanwhile, the Donald Trump administration is desperately keen to withdraw its forces from Afghanistan before the next US presidential elections in 2020. Pakistan is, therefore, under considerable US pressure to get its Taliban proteges to reach a reasonable political settlement with the Afghan government.

Pakistan is also in dire economic straits with its foreign exchange reserves hovering around just $10 billion. It has received loans from China, Saudi Arabia and the UAE, together with agreements on some deferred payments for oil imports. The IMF has crafted a three-year $6 billion package for Pakistan. This is to be supplemented by concessional credits from the World Bank and Asian Development Bank, amounting to $4 billion. Pakistan knows that the US significantly influences the IMF and World Bank. Washington can also persuade Saudi Arabia and the UAE to turn the screws on Pakistan.

India would be well advised to carefully analyse these developments and craft a policy involving serious back channel contacts and talks, not only with Pakistan’s government but also its all powerful military. There should be no question of any formally ‘structured’ or ‘comprehensive dialogue’ with Pakistan until the total dismantling of its infrastructure of terrorism. Pakistan acknowledged in 2004 that the comprehensive dialogue with India was being resumed only after its assurances that territory under its control would not be used for terrorism against India.

Experience has shown that reaching out to people in Pakistan by liberally issuing visas to enable them to visit relatives and friends in India pays rich dividends. We have also formally approved group tourism between the two countries to historical, tourist and religious sites. We should, therefore, insist while opening the Kartarpur corridor that the agreement on group tourism, signed during Atal Bihari Vajpayee’s Lahore visit, should be implemented. Exchanges of visits by students, scholars, businessmen and cultural groups between India and Pakistan should be facilitated and revived. While being realistic and firm in dealing with Pakistan’s establishment, it pays to reach out to its people. Vajpayee approved keeping rail and road routes open even during the Kargil conflict.

Easing procedures for people from across the border to meet friends and relatives gives an essential human dimension to the relationship. Pakistan can also be informed that we could agree to their desire to host the next Saarc summit if they fully implement the provisions of the Saarc Free Trade Agreement. They should, however, end discriminatory practices against Indian exports as a prelude to normal trade and investment ties. All this will, however, fall apart if the infrastructure of terrorism is not dismantled across the border, thereby permitting the likes of Hafiz Saeed, Zakiur Rehman Lakhvi and Masood Azhar to run riot.

Facebook Twitter Linkedin Email Disclaimer Views expressed above are the author's own.
