Defeat may turn favourite bhatija into prodigal son

The Samajwadi Party ’s collapse in the 2019 Lok Sabha elections is a body blow to Akhilesh Yadav . It’s the second time a mega alliance stitched by him — and opposed by his father and party founder Mulayam Singh Yadav — has come kaput.SP looks set to win just five seats — Azamgarh , contested by Akhilesh, and Mainpuri, where Mulayam Singh Yadav is SP candidate, besides Moradabad, Rampur and Sambhal. In 2014 too, SP could win only five Lok Sabha seats, but it had far higher ambitions this time, given its alliance with BSP and RLD.An eerie silence prevailed at the SP headquarters in Lucknow all day as partymen struggled to come to terms with the loss.While Akhilesh had pitched Mayawati as the next PM, implying he would take a shot at the CM’s chair come 2022, the collapse of both allies means an inevitable tussle over the chief minister’s post.The immediate task for Akhilesh is to introspect and find a winning strategy. His development card in the 2017 assembly elections and the ‘Kaam Bolta Hai’ slogan did not draw in voters. This time, Akhilesh decided to go back to the tried and tested ‘caste arithmetic’ by tying up with bitter rival Mayawati, but to no avail. This continued failure could trigger a tussle within the party too, as Mulayam Singh had publicly expressed his disapproval over half the seats in the state being given to BSP in the alliance. Earlier too, Mulayam had warned that SP’s alliance with Congress will not bring any gains.A bigger worry, though, are the losses. Wife Dimple and cousin Dharmendra were trailing in Kannauj and Badaun seats, respectively, to BJP candidates till press time on Thursday, vindicating BJP’s claim that the Yadav voter is moving towards Modi.It looks like Mulayam Singh’s margin in Mainpuri will be reduced to below 1 lakh votes, compared to his 3.6 lakh victory margin in 2014. The wins in Moradabad, Rampur and Sambhal are a given, considering the large Muslim population, and would perhaps offer little solace to SP. Further, Congress is entering the Uttar Pradesh picture now, with Priyanka Gandhi , to get a share of the Muslim vote.
