Saffron allies in sync, but CM’s post may be sticky point in Oct

With the BJP and Shiv Sena repeating their 2014 winning streak in Maharashtra, the decision of both parties to ignore tensions in the alliance and forge a tie-up to prevent a split in votes has proven beneficial. The ending of the ‘Saamna’ (confrontation) and the LS win bodes well for the saffron alliance for the October assembly polls.Apart from the fact that their prospects for assembly elections stand brightened, the grand slam for the NDA has especially brought relief to Matoshree. “Had we not inked a poll pact with BJP, the Sena tally would have been reduced to three or four of the total 48 LS seats in the state,” a Sena functionary said. The party bagged 18 seats as against BJP’s 23.The BJP leadership’s reaching out to its oldest ally before the polls by setting aside the acrimony of the last five years played rich dividends and cemented the partnership. Uddhav yielded to Fadnavis’s goading and agreed to seat-sharing talks with Amit Shah in April, it is said. The BJP president’s move to visit Matoshree for talks went down well with Thackeray.Fadnavis and Uddhav turned the poll into a pro-incumbency exercise, thanks to the Modi brand. The Sena retained its 3 Mumbai seats, including Mumbai South, where Congress’s Milind Deora had posed a challenge to sitting MP Arvind Sawant. Thackeray’s gamble to repeat most of the Sena’s old guard too paid off to quite an extent. For instance, Bhavana Gawli (Yavatmal-Washim) and Gajanan Kirtikar (Mumbai North-West) kept their seats. Shrirang Barne’s victory in Mawal against NCP’s Parth Pawar, son of Ajit Pawar, with a margin of over two lakh votes will be cherished by Matoshree.The saffron allies also made gains in western Maharashtra, considered an NCP stronghold, with BJP winning 5 of the 12 seats here and the Sena 4; the NCP won three seats in the region. The Sena suffered a few key losses too. Union minister Anant Geete lost to NCP’s Sunil Tatkare in Raigad, while Shivajirao Adhalrao Patil lost to NCP’s Amol Kolhe, a TV actor and political greenhorn, from Shirur in Pune. Veteran MP Chandrakant Khaire lost to Imtiaz Jaleel of MIM in Aurangabad.Uddhav had extensively toured the state and instructed Sainiks to campaign for BJP with equal fervour in constituencies with BJP candidates. Moreover, he went to Gandhinagar to cheer up Shah, BJP candidate from the Gujarat capital, and Varanasi, from where Modi filed his LS nomination. Uddhav also issued a warning to Saamna editor Sanjay Raut asking him to refrain from penning acerbic editorials against Modi and Shah.Fadnavis on Thursday thanked Uddhav for teaming up with BJP without malice or doubt. “Sena helped us in our constituencies and vice versa,” he said, adding, “Uddhavji saw to it that there was perfect coordination between the two allies.”But the Sena has worries. A section thinks that with BJP now in such a strong position at the Centre, Modi, Shah and Fadnavis may give Matoshree a rebuff. For Uddhav the key issue is if BJP will offer the Sena a key cabinet rank and two MoS portfolios in Team Modi and if BJP will keep its word and accept Sena’s demand for equal share in power, which includes sharing the CM’s post by turns. Should BJP give a cold shoulder, it would mean uneasy ties and irate Saamna editorials in the run-up to assembly elections.Uddhav on Thursday said the Sena-BJP would fight all forthcoming elections in the state together. “Modi again proved that ‘Modi hai toh mumkin hai,’” he said, adding he would meet the PM to congratulate him. He said the Ram Mandir issue was part of the alliance’s manifesto and the Sena would pursue it.
