HC orders compliance of Rs 5L relief for jail inmate’s death

Allahabad: Taking serious note of non-payment of compensation to a woman, whose son had died in jail custody, despite courts order, the Allahabad high court has directed the district magistrate of Shamli to pay rupees five lakh to the petitioner-mother.The court warned that if the amount is not paid to the petitioner, the Shamli district magistrate and principal secretary (home) shall present themselves before the court on May 24, the next date of hearing, to explain why the earlier order dated April 4, 2019 was not complied with.Hearing a writ petition filed by one Meena, whose son died an unnatural death in Saharanpur district jail, a division bench comprising Justice Shashi Kant Gupta and Justice Pankaj Bhatia said, “A perusal of the order dated April 4, 2019 clearly indicates that the District Magistrate, Shamli was directed to pay Rs 5 lakhs as interim maintenance. Despite the specific order passed by this court, not even a single penny has been paid to the petitioner in pursuance of the aforesaid interim order. It is clearly disobedience of the order passed by this court.”Adesh Bharadwaj alias Adarsh, son of petitioner Meena, was arrested by GRP in a criminal case and sent to Saharanpur district jail. He was alleged to be a minor at the time of arrest.During detention period, he was deputed in kitchen for cooking. One day, a big vessel containing starch fell on him while cooking. He sustained grievous injuries and succumbed later. On August 4, 2016, the National Human Right Commission had inquired the matter and recommended interim compensation of rupees one lakh to the petitioner. In pursuance of the same, rupees one lakh was paid to the petitioner.The petitioner moved several applications before Shamli district magistrate seeking higher compensation for the death of her son in custody of jail authorities but no heed was paid. Meena then filed the petition before high court, requesting it to direct authorities to pay just compensation to her as her young son had died in jail. Subsequently, taking into consideration the order of apex court in custodial death matters, the court on April 4, 2019 directed Shamli district magistrate to pay a sum of rupees five lakh as interim relief to her and had fixed May 16, 2019 as the next date of hearing.
