Steady stream of visitors to Krishna’s residence triggers speculation

Ramesh Jarkiholi, Sudhakar meet BJP leaders at ex-CM’s residence; Sumalatha also stops by

Fuelling speculation about the possibility of the start of ‘Operation Lotus’, two rebel Congress MLAs — Ramesh Jarkiholi and K. Sudhakar — met Bharatiya Janata Party State president B.S. Yeddyurappa and senior leader R. Ashok at the residence of BJP leader S.M. Krishna on Sunday.

Speaking to media persons after the meeting, Mr. Ramesh Jarkiholi said: “I am not alone. We are a team. We cannot disclose now when we will resign, but we will. For now, we are in Congress.”

When further quizzed about his intentions, he questioned media persons whether they would inform anyone prior to a sting operation, in yet another indication that the rebels would switch camps. This meeting has come a day after Mr. Jarkiholi met Umesh Jadhav, who switched from Congress to BJP and won the Kalaburagi Lok Sabha seat defeating M. Mallikarjun Kharge. Mr. Yeddyurappa’s personal assistant Santosh, was also present at the meeting, triggering speculation.

Speculations are rife that Mr. Ramesh Jarkiholi would lead a team of rebel Congress and JD(S) MLAs to a resort in Goa in the coming week, precipitating a crisis in the government. However, Mr. Ramesh Jarkiholi refused to either confirm or deny this. Mr. Jarkiholi has turned out to be a rebel leader threatening to resign and switch to the BJP with a group of MLAs for over six months now, but is yet to make it a reality, though he had camped in Mumbai with some MLAs for over 15 days in January 2019. The Congress has petitioned the Assembly Speaker seeking disqualification of four MLAs — Ramesh Jarkiholi, Mahesh Kumatahalli, B. Nagendra, and Umesh Jadhav — of whom Mr. Jadhav already resigned and joined the BJP. The complaint against the rest are pending before Speaker K.R. Ramesh Kumar. When quizzed on Mr. Jarkiholi’s plans to resign, Mr. Yeddyurappa denied any knowledge of it and said he did not discuss politics with him. All leaders, including Mr. Jarkiholi attempted to downplay the meeting, saying that it was a coincidence that the Congress MLAs and BJP leaders came at the same time to meet Mr. Krishna. Dr. Sudhakar, also said to be disgruntled with the Congress, said Mr. Krishna was his “political guru” and he often met him. “I was coming to meet Mr. Krishna today to enquire on his health and called Mr. Jarkiholi, and he gladly tagged along. It’s a personal visit and we did not know that other BJP leaders were also coming,” he said.

But sources said Mr. Ashok and other leaders had an informal meeting in Mr. Krishna’s house after Mr. Yeddyurappa left with Sumalatha, MP from Mandya, who had come to thank Mr. Krishna.

Will consult people on issue-based support to BJP: Sumalatha

Sumalatha, who won the Mandya Lok Sabha seat as an Independent with BJP support, said she would consult the people of Mandya on extending “issue-based support” to the BJP in Parliament. “An Independent MP cannot join a party, but can extend support. The people of Mandya are my priority, and I will be visiting every taluk of the constituency to thank the people for my victory. I will consult them and take a call,” she said. She visited party president B.S. Yeddyurappa and senior leader S.M. Krishna on Sunday to thank them for their support on Sunday and was speaking to media persons later.

Mr. Yeddyurappa while congratulating her on the victory, said the BJP not fielding a candidate and Prime Minister Narendra Modi seeking votes for her in Mysuru rally played a key role in her victory. When quizzed whether he would invite her to join the BJP, he said it was a decision left to her.
