Temperature in Telangana crosses 47 degrees, Hyd boils at 44.8 degree Celsius

Temperature in Telangana crosses 47 degrees, Hyd boils at 44.8 degree Celsius

Medchal-Malkajgiri district, which includes large parts of Secunderabad and some parts of Hyderabad witnessed the temperature shoot up to 46.6 degrees.

news Weather

Telangana continued to reel under the effect of the heat wave as several parts of the state witnessed the temperature cross 47 degree Celsius. The Telangana State Development Planning Society (TDSDPS) said that Neelwai in Mancherial district witnessed the highest temperature in the state on Sunday, at 47.8 degrees, followed by Dharmapuri in Jagtial district at 47.7 degree Celsius.

Other parts of Jagtial district like Endapally Rajarampalli and Jaina witnessed maximum temperatures of 47.7 and 47.6 degrees respectively. Maredupalle in Peddapalli district sizzled at 47.5 degrees while Kothapallegori in Jayashankar-Bhupalpally district saw the temperature shoot up to 47.5 degree Celsius.

TDSDPS data also stated that Adilabad district saw a maximum temperature of 46.4 degrees, while neighbouring Kumuram Bheem Asifabad district also saw the mercury rise to 46.2 degree Celsius. Normal life was also affected in Warangal city as Warangal Urban district saw a maximum temperature of 46.9 degrees.

Meanwhile, Medchal-Malkajgiri district, which includes large parts of Secunderabad and Hyderabad witnessed the temperature shoot up to 46.6 degrees. The maximum temperature in the districts of Hyderabad and Rangareddy was 44.8 and 44.9 degree Celsius respectively.

The Indian Meteorological Department (IMD) has already issued a heat wave warning and said that the temperature is likely to remain the same until May 30.

"Heat wave conditions are very likely to prevail at isolated pockets over alll the districts of Telangana. Public are advised not to expose themselves directly to the sunlight and take necessary precautions due to the heat wave," the IMD said in its warning.

The severe heat wave conditions have affected normal life in the Telugu states, with authorities issuing several warnings, asking people to protect themselves especially in the afternoons.

Earlier this week, a government order was issued to postpone reopening of schools in Telangana by two weeks, due to the existing heat wave conditions in the state. All schools in the state will now reopen on June 12 and not June 1, as per the order.
