Rebel uncle Shivpal Yadav cautions Akhilesh Yadav, says don’t trust Mayawati

highlights Shivpal Yadav had earlier termed the alliance as opportunistic.

Shivpal says the BSP-SP alliance lacks credibility among people.

Yadav says BSP chief Mayawati will not will a single seat.

New Delhi:

Pragatisheel Samajwadi Party-Lohia chief Shivpal Yadav has advised former Uttar Pradesh CM Akhilesh Yadav not to trust the Bahujan Samaj Party chief Mayawati. This came after SP- BSP announced a Grand Alliance to fight the BJP in the upcoming general polls. Earlier, Shivpal had termed the alliance between the SP and BSP as opportunistic and said that the party workers will never accept this unholy alliance.

"It's an opportunistic alliance so it lacks credibility among people. The Bahujan Samaj Party, particularly ever since the breakup of its alliance with the Samajwadi Party in June 1995, had left no stone unturned to humiliate party patriarch Mulayam Singh Yadav and other senior leaders like Janeshwar Mishra," said Shivpal Yadav on Tuesday, adding: "The results of the coming Lok Sabha elections would endorse my observation about the SP-BSP alliance."

Referring to the "Lucknow guest house incident", Shivpal said Akhilesh should be wary of Mayawati. In 1995, Mayawati was heckled and pushed by Samajwadi Party workers at a guest house in the Uttar Pradesh capital after she pulled out of the two-year-old coalition government with the Samajwadi, then led by Akhilesh Yadav's father Mulayam Singh Yadav. Mayawati later formed a government with the BJP's support.

While addressing a rally in Chandoli, Uttar Pradesh, Shivpal said, "Behenji (Mayawati) had levelled allegations of sexual harassment against me. I had said at the time that I am ready for an inquiry, I am ready for a narco test. But I wanted that Mayawati should also have a narco test done. She refused."

"You can't trust people who sell tickets. Who used to abuse Netaji (Mulayam Singh)? She used to call them 'gunde (hoodlums)'. Today they have come together. Can she be trusted? She won't win many seats," said the Samajwadi rebel.
