7 FIRs lodged, 14 loan sharks booked

RAJKOT: The lok darbar or public hearing organized recently by Rajkot police against the terror of money lenders seems to have instilled confidence among the victims who have started coming forward with complaints. On Monday, seven complaints were lodged and 14 loan sharks booked in Rajkot city.At Rajkot A division police station, Ashish Gohel lodged a complaint against Jatin Gohel accusing him of harassing him for the recovery of Rs 1.75 lakh loan that Ashish had taken from him.In a spate of complaints, Ranchhod Bavaliya lodged a complaint against Narsinh Bavaliya and his son Jagdish Bavaliya with Kuvadava Road police station, accusing them of harassing him for the recovery of Rs 4 lakh that Ranchhod’s father Arjan had taken from them. “After the death of Arjan, the Bavalia father-son duo had started harassing Ranchhod for the recovery,” said an official from Kuvadava Road police station.Kuvadava Road police station also registered another complaint in which Jayanti Makhela accused Amu Koli of harassing him for the recovery of Rs 3 lakh. “Makhela claimed that he had paid Rs 3 lakh with interest to Koli. Yet, Koli was asking for Rs 3 lakh more,” said the official.Meanwhile at Rajkot taluka police station, Vimal Patel lodged a complaint against Narendra Gondalia, Ratilal Viradia and Rajesh Bhalala, accusing them of harassing him for the recovery of the amount with interest that he had taken as a loan from them.Continuing with the onslaught against loan shark menace, Bhaktinagar police station registered a complaint filed by Dinesh Gondalia who accused Prakash Humbal of harassing him for the recovery of the loan he had taken from him. “Gondalia had taken Rs 90,000 from Humbal against which he paid him Rs 1.85 lakh. However, Humbal continued to mount pressure on him to give him more interest,” said an official from Bhaktinagar police station.Meanwhile at Malaviyanagar police station, Alpesh Varshani lodged a complaint against Jagdish Kapooria accusing him of harassing him for the recovery of the loan he had taken from him. “Varshani claimed that he had already paid Rs 3 lakh with interest to Kapooria which he had taken from him. Yet, Kapooria was asking for more interest,” said an official from Malaviyanagar police station.The last complaint was lodged with Pradyumannagar police station, in which Mohemmed Hussein Sheikh alleged that he was being pressurized and harassed by Shehnaz Juneja, Momin, Qasam Agham, Altaf Agham and Mustafa Khiyani for the recovery of the money he had taken from them. “Sheikh alleged that the accused threatened to usurp his shop, if he did not pay the amount,” said an official from Pradyumannagar police station.
