The 100-day agenda for Modi 2.0?

For Narendra Modi 2.0, the mandate of 2019 has brought a thicker stability cushion but a heavier load of expectations. The voters' message in Modi's inbox is: Deliver what we want and what we need. The bucket list for 1.3 billion can be grouped under three key must-dos - how to rectify setbacks of 2014-2019, milestones to launch for 2024 and how to deliver on pet saffron ideological agendas.

The Domestic Agenda

Ram Temple:The matter is subjudice. RSS and affiliates in early 2019 were eager to announce a time line. But the Modi-Shah duo, in order to avoid a confrontation with the apex court and diluting the 'growth' message image, asked the Sangh to apply the brakes.

Article 35A: BJP's 'Sankalp Patra' has promised annulling the controversial clause that provides special rights to residents of Jammu and Kashmir.

BJP says it was added to the Constitution of India "without Parliament's nod". This is high on RSS's wish list. Government may move with caution depending on the situation in Kashmir.

Infra spending to zoom: The BJP manifesto promises a `100 lakh crore investment in infrastructure by 2024. The government plans to kickstart the first tranche of investment from the word go. The road and highways ministry promises to double the length of highways to two lakh km by 2024. Top sources said proposals for 50,000-60,000 kms of highways are almost ready and may be cleared within the first month of government formation.

Rural development: Under Phase III of the Pradhan Mantri Gram Sadak Yojna (PMGSY), 1.25 lakh km of link routes costing `1.3 lakh crore may get cleared in the first Cabinet meet itself.

National urban mission: About 200 urban clusters as hubs around big cities may be cleared, over and above the 300 large urban centres developed so far.

More smart cities: Smart city mission to expand beyond existing 100. Total value of tenders might be pushed to `1.5 lakh crore by June-end. The mission completes four years next month, an anniversary that will be marked with a planned expansion to more cities beyond the 100 covered in Smart City 1.

Housing & Social Welfare: The Pradhan Mantri Awas Yojana (Urban), the affordable housing programme for the poor, will see stepped-up efforts in the first 100 days. The social sector ministries have prepared a list of projects that will be launched within a month. Scholarship programmes under the Ministry of Social Justice and Empowerment to be extended with better implementation. The Tribal Affairs Ministry is preparing a plan with a major thrust on livelihood and education for tribal students. Minimum support price scheme (MSPS) for minor forest produce to be fine tuned.

Tough on corruption: Vijay Mallya and Nirav Modi managed to escape from India after carrying out economic offences. The government will speed up its efforts to bring back these offenders who have been declared fugitives to showcase its intent. Tougher laws to check black money creation, especially through benami activities, could be coming.

Education for all:The HRD ministry has drafted a nine-point priority list including the launch of a National Education Policy, filling of faculty positions, increase in the number of Institutions of Eminence (IoE), revival of the Higher Education Commission of India and setting up a new accreditation system.

Foreign Policy

The first two months of Narendra Modi's upcoming tenure will see hectic engagement with foreign leaders carrying out diplomacy that will set the tone and tenor of India's foreign policy for the next five years.

Neighbourhood outreach: While in 2014 Prime Minister Modi invited SAARC leaders for his oath-taking ceremony, this time he might not do so, but the focus on neighbourhood would remain. Following tradition, Prime Minister Narendra Modi has once again chosen the neighbourhood as his first foreign destination. He is to travel to the Maldives next month as his first state visit. Maldives and Pakistan were the only two South Asian neighbours where Narendra Modi had not paid a State visit, although he did attend President Ibrahim Solih's oath-taking ceremony after he defeated the China-backed autocrat Abdulla Yameen in the elections held last year.

Sources have also told India that the two countries could sign the Mutual Legal Assistance Treaty (MLAT), agreement for cooperation on terrorism, transnational crime and criminal matters, during this visit. PM Modi is also likely to visit Bhutan and Nepal in the coming months. He was due to visit Thimphu in 2018 for the celebrations of 50 years of diplomatic ties. Dhaka is also in talks with Delhi for a visit to Bangladesh.

Multilateral meets: The next important visit of the PM would be to Bishkek, Kyrgyzstan, for the SCO summit where he would come face-to-face with his Pakistani counterpart Imran Khan.

While both spoke over the phone, India's policy towards Islamabad remains unchanged -- Pakistan has to create an environment conducive for talks. PM Modi will hold bilateral meetings with Russian President Vladimir Putin and Chinese President Xi Jinping on the sidelines of the summit. Both are due to visit India later this year. The Chinese President and PM Modi would hold their second informal summit in India after the Wuhan meet of 2018.

It is in Bishkek that India is also likely to hold an India-Central Asia Summit level meeting keeping in mind the strategic importance of the region.

The next big summit level meeting would be the G-20 summit to be held in Osaka, Japan in mid-June where Prime Minister Modi is likely to have bilateral meetings with most world leaders.

The bilateral between President Trump and Prime Minister Modi would take place on the sidelines, where, according to a statement, both leaders agreed to "discuss bilateral relations and global matters. They also agreed to work together for further enhancing the close and strategic partnership between the two countries."

He has also been invited by French President Macron to be a guest at the G7 leaders' summit to be held in France on August 24-26.

Incoming visits: Prime Minister Modi would also have a host of leaders visiting India, beginning with BIMSTEC (Bay of Bengal Initiative for Multiple-Sectoral Technical and Economic Cooperation) leaders attending the oath-taking ceremony as chief guests. The other leaders who would be visiting India this year are US President Trump, Chinese President Xi Jinping, Russian President Putin, Australian PM Scott Morrison, Japanese Premier Shinzo Abe.

Economy & Business

A new industrial policy, incentives to promote manufacturing in key employment generating sectors, rationalisation of direct tax rates and speeding up of mega-infrastructure projects across sectors are amongst the hundreds of suggestions that are reaching the Prime Minister's Office (PMO) from various Central government departments these days.

The feedback is in response to a directive from the PMO that sought a priority list of decisions that can be announced and implemented during the first 100 days of the second term of the Narendra Modi government. While there is no clarity on the specific issues or policy measures the government is going to announce, there are certain areas which it will not miss.

Union budget: The full Budget, to be presented in July, may see changes in the direct tax rates. On the corporate tax front, the attempt will be to lower the rates marginally. On personal tax, the exemption threshold should increase to `5 lakhs. The government may also announce stringent measures - as part of Budget or otherwise - to avoid indirect tax evasion to compensate for the revenue loss. Additional borrowing for infrastructure funding and institutional mechanisms for long-term financing for infrastructure development projects in the private sector can be expected. The objective will be asset creation and in process, creation of employment opportunities.

Agriculture: With over 50% of India's population depending on agriculture for livelihood, there will be measures to put more money into the hands of farmers and landless labourers.

The Prime Minister's poll promise to take away the threshold for availing the 100% Central scheme of direct income support to the farmer (`6,000 in three installments in a year) should happen.

All the social sector programmes, especially the flagship schemes in the health and employment generation sectors, will see additional push in the first three months of the government.

Ease of doing business: Given the obsession the Narendra Modi government has with improving India's ranking in several global indicators, there will be special emphasis to ensure that India improves its position in the World Bank's Ease of Doing Business rankings this year. Relaxation of laws and rules, digitisation of data and processes (creation of digital land records is one such initiative that will get a big push) are unlikely to be ignored.

Investment: The government will also announce policy measures aimed at attracting foreign direct investment or domestic private investments and try to showcase India as an ideal place for companies that may be shifting base from China due to the ongoing China-US trade war.

Digital policy: Policies and legislations to protect Indian interests in digital economy could also be prioritised by the government, though its impact on bilateral trade and investment talks with major economic powers like the USA will be interesting to watch.

To conclude, the Modi government's 100-day agenda will be packed with policy and administrative measures that can create a quick impact on businesses and industry - global and domestic - as well as the poor and the marginal Indian citizen. The government would want to be seen that it has hit the ground running.

Also Read | The people of Kashi told me not to come here till the results: PM Modi

Also Watch | PM Modi reaches out to minority, receives mixed response
