The road ahead is Federalism

Himanshi Matta is a former journalist and media professional. She works with Oxfam India and leads the organisation’s media relations and communication work. Himanshi has worked with leading media houses including the Press Trust of India, NewsX and NDTV. She has covered politics, courtroom battles, crime, health and aviation. Himanshi has also worked with international human rights organisation Amnesty International India. LESS ... MORE

The 2019 election verdict is out. While the majority of those who voted for the current government are floating on a make-believe cloud of progress, the dissidents are vigorously scrapping strategy papers in the bin.

Perhaps this note falls in the latter category but might serve both parties.

Believe it or not, India is a still a federal democracy and this election has not altered the structure (for now). Our Constitution identifies the country as a “Union of States” and these states have immense resources, power and institutional structures of accountability. In this “Union”, there are leaders and leadership styles which can change the value and expectations of its citizens. Simply put, Mamata Banerjee has more power than Arvind Kejriwal to change the mood of people in her state. It’s another question, whether she has been successful at using her powers constructively or not but our federal system provides her with that ability.

The efficiency of state governments, their ability to deal with a crisis and adapting to the changing values and principles of people —-these are some of the fundamentals that are underplayed by political pundits while discussing the election mandate. But, they have a huge impact on public perceptions.

A simple example of a leadership style which came from the “Union of (our) States” but translated into a national movement is that of the current Prime Minister. A look at his chief ministership indicates that he managed to create a positive perception about three principles—Gujarat was considered an efficient state, majority of its citizens believed that riots were handled well and that their chief minister was open to innovation whether technology or industry. Without debating the intrinsic worth of these beliefs, we can agree that they became the basis of his national political campaign in 2014.

None of his contenders in today’s time, nationally or regionally, have shown the same vigour to devise these perceptions in the state. At the national level, Congress President Rahul Gandhi has no experience to showcase his governance skills and at a regional level, most Chief Ministers have not assembled the confidence of their population to translate it into a national movement. While there are many other factors which have been widely debated, the basics are precisely where we need to look.

Certainly, all of this is based on the assumption that our fellow countrymen and women care about development and when the time comes, they will prioritise their own good over other nonpareil issues. It is also on the assumption that electorates are choosing leaders who have a history of performance rather than the clout of a dynasty. It is indeed a joyous assumption but one which must be held dearly. It is precisely what this country needs to create – a secular foundation for future rule.

If the believers feel that India has moved to a presidential format (similar to the United States), then our next leader is in the state, a Chief Minister or soon to be one. It works for both parties (believers and non-believers) to concentrate on choosing strong state governments and making them work for us.

We need to ask tough questions to our leaders and political parties both the ruling and in opposition. Madhya Pradesh Chief Minister Kamal Nath brought the stringent National Security Act for cow slaughter. Three people have been arrested and booked under the act for allegedly slaughtering cow illegally. It is perhaps for this reason that Congress leaders did not promise action against “gau-rakshaks” during the election speeches. It clearly shows that leaders are willing to change their political values to accommodate majoritarian views. This is more freighting than the election we just saw.

By overthrowing the incumbent in several states in the last assembly elections, the population proved that they still believe in a diverse and robust federal system. We must latch on to this hope and nurture our federalism to challenge the rule with a viable, reliable and tested leader. It could be a strategy worth trying.

Facebook Twitter Linkedin Email Disclaimer Views expressed above are the author's own.
