It’s May 28: Here Are The Top Stories From AP And Telangana

1. YS Jagan Invites Chandrababu For Swearing-In Ceremony

YSRCP supremo YS Jagan Mohan Reddy telephonically invited TDP chief Chandrababu Naidu for the former’s swearing-in ceremony. The YSR Congress party, led by YS Jagan won the Andhra Pradesh Assembly elections with a thumping majority. The landslide win has made the entire country sit up and take notice of the young CM to-be.

2. Nara Lokesh Blames Party Cadre For TDP Debacle

TDP general secretary and Chandrababu Naidu's son Nara Lokesh expressed his deep displeasure over the party leaders and activists. Extremely upset with the election results, he claimed that the party leaders deceived Chandrababu/ further stating that while the Electronic Voting Machines contributed to 10 percent of the deception/ the remaining 90 percent came from the party leaders.

3. Former TV9 CEO Ravi Prakash Files Bail Plea In Supreme Court

Former TV9 CEO Ravi Prakash has approached the Supreme Court seeking bail, after the Telangana High Court earlier struck down his application for anticipatory bail.Earlier the anticipatory bail applications including a lunch motion petition filed by Ravi Prakash was dismissed in the Telangana High Court on May 23.

4. Valigonda Shocked Over Rape Of Differently-Abled Teen Girl

In a horrific incident, a 19-year-old differently-abled girl was allegedly raped on Sunday night by her neighbour at Valigonda in Yadadri Bhuvanagiri district. Valigonda police apprehended the accused on Monday morning. According to reports, the girl has been physically challenged and speech disabled since her childhood. The accused raped her on Sunday night when she found was sleeping alone at the verandah of her home, while her parents were sleeping on the terrace.

5. Only 1,137 Of 3.8 Lakh Students Pass After Telangana Inter Results Re-Evaluation

Only 1,137 candidates passed/ out of the 3,82,116 who failed the Intermediate examinations conducted by the TSBIE after the re-evaluation results were declared on Monday evening.

6. Heatwave Grips Andhra, Temperature To Touch 47 degrees

Andhra Pradesh has been experiencing severe heat conditions across the state since the last three days and the mercury levels are expected to soar higher. The RTGS (Real Time Governance Society) has issued an alert warning that the temperatures are likely to increase further to a vast extent.

7. Painter dies at work due to electrocution in Kamareddy

A painter hailing form Uttar Pradesh died due to electrocution while at work in Ramareddy Circle of Kamareddy district headquarters on Monday. He was at work at a three-storied house at Ramareddy Circle, when he came in contact with a high tension wire which led to his electrocution

8. Telangana: Intermediate syllabus revised for second language

Telangana State Board of Intermediate Education (TSBIE) has revised the syllabi of second languages including Urdu, Sanskrit, Hindi and Arabic by constituting the subject committees with professors, lecturers of degree colleges and junior lecturers.

9. Hyderabad: Two groups smuggling ganja busted

Three drug peddlers who were on a train smuggling marijuana from Visakhapatnam to Agra/ were intercepted and nabbed by the Railway Police on Monday. The police then seized 136 kg of marijuana worth approximately Rs 20.4 lakh/ from them.

10. Hyderabad: Two held for stealing idol

Two employees of a wine shop, who had stolen a Panchaloha idol of a goddess installed in a house at Malkajgiri, were arrested by the police on Monday.
