Brace Up For Hotter Days Ahead

Hyderabad: The sun has been coming down hard on the Telugu states with temperatures touching close to 47 Degrees Celsius in pockets of Andhra Pradesh and over 46 Degrees Celsius in pockets of Telangana. People are being warned by the departments concerned about the heat wave that has been taking over the city. Bulletins are being sent out by the Meteorological Department warning people to stay indoors.There have been many recorded cases of heat strokes in the Telugu states. There have also been a few fatalities due to these heat strokes .

Venkatagiri mandal in Nellore district witnessed the highest temperature so far and it is followed by Tadepalligudem mandal in West Godavari where temperature of 46.53° Celsius was recorded. In seven other stations in Guntur and Chittoor districts temperature was above 45° Celsius. The RTGS (Real Time Governance Society) has issued an alert warning that the temperatures are likely to increase further to a vast extent. As predicted by India Meteorological Department and the State government’s RTGS, Andhra Pradesh has been witnessing heat wave condition from May 25. Some mandals in the vulnerable districts of West Godavari, Krishna, Guntur, Prakasam, Nellore and Chittoor are under severe heat wave condition, officials say.

The Telangana State Development Planning Society (TDSDPS) said that Neelwai in Mancherial district witnessed the highest temperature in the state on Sunday, at 47.8 degrees, followed by Dharmapuri in Jagtial district at 47.7 degree Celsius.

Other parts of Jagtial district like Endapally Rajarampalli and Jaina witnessed maximum temperatures of 47.7 and 47.6 degrees respectively. Maredupalle in Peddapalli district sizzled at 47.5 degrees while Kothapallegori in Jayashankar-Bhupalpally district saw the temperature shoot up to 47.5 degree Celsius.

TDSDPS data also stated that Adilabad district saw a maximum temperature of 46.4 degrees, while neighbouring Kumuram Bheem Asifabad district also saw the mercury rise to 46.2 degree Celsius. Normal life was also affected in Warangal city as Warangal Urban district saw a maximum temperature of 46.9 degrees.

Meanwhile, Medchal-Malkajgiri district, which includes large parts of Secunderabad and Hyderabad witnessed the temperature shoot up to 46.6 degrees. The maximum temperature in the districts of Hyderabad and Rangareddy was 44.8 and 44.9 degree Celsius respectively.

Necessary warning have been sent in both states for people to keep themselves protected in both the Telugu states. The Telangana Government has also postponed reopening of schools from June 1 to June 12.

Also Read: Heatwave Grips Andhra, Temperature To Touch 47 degrees
