SBI and customers: Honest talk about unprofessional behaviour

Customers vent against ‘rude, ill-mannered, obnoxious behaviour’ from employees



Our Correspondent

Mokokchung, May 28 (EMN): The regular reports about displeased customers concerning unprofessional ‘treatment’ from some State Bank of India (SBI) employees were some of the main topics of discussions at a SBI-customer meeting in Mokokchung recently.

The SBI, one of the country’s largest banking institutions, conducted a ‘mega’ customer meeting on May 20 in Mokokchung with the objective to engage customer’s experience and to provide better services to its customers.

The meeting was organized by the SBI’s regional business office at Mokokchung. The event aimed at ‘nurturing customers’ trust’ and their expectations from the two branches at Mokokchung.

During the interaction with the bank’s officials, customers blazed complaints at them about unprofessional treatment, besides show of ‘ill manners,’ rude and obnoxious behaviour from the bank’s employees.

They also complained about a common occurrence that is the bank’s ATM booths having no cash (“No cash available”). Likewise, they complained about another common phenomenon, the “link down” issues.

All these issues cause immense inconveniences to customers especially those from the business community, the bank’s officials were told.

Customers also suggested that local community ethos should be taught to the bank employees for customer friendly environment in the bank beside propose the bank official to start an evening bank for the students and both government and private employees.

Likewise, the SBI’s customers there have advised the bank to root out the “middle-man culture”; these middlemen act as channels to avail loans from the bank and deducts a percentage from the beneficiary’s loans, they said.

After digesting the feedback from the participants, the assistant general manager of the establishment, H Hangsing warned the bank’s employees against ill treating customers. The official warned bank employees that ‘ill-treatment to customers will not be tolerated.’ Likewise, he deemed ‘middle-men’ illegal and assured legal action against ‘such actions.’

Hangsing said that the SBI brings products to the market according to the need of the customers. He urged its customers, especially the youths, to use the bank’s digital platform too because it eases work besides being more secure.

Subrata Bhattacharjee, chief manager of the SBI at Mokokchung also talked to the customers about the use of alternative banking channels such as the Yono SBI, an omni-channel digital banking and lifestyle platform.

The meeting was attended by members of the business community, students, and stakeholders from Mokokchung.

The bank’s officials noted the feedback and suggestions brought by the participants to improve the services and products.
