The Congress problem: Dynasty in the DNA

Sunil Gatade

Sunil Gatade

Senior Journalist

It was not exactly a case of finding scapegoats for the shocking defeat of the Congress in the Lok Sabha elections but to state as to what all went wrong in what now appears to be a badly bungled exercise. Ashok Gehlot, Kamal Nath and P Chidambaram were in the firing line in the just-concluded meeting of the Congress Working Committee and rightfully so.

None other than Congress president Rahul Gandhi found fault with them for pushing for ticket to their children in the Lok Sabha polls despite Gandhi expressing reservations due to the larger context. They were accused of putting the interests of their sons above the party at a time when the Congress was fighting with its back to the wall to keep Narendra Modi out of power.

P Chidambaram’s son Karti Chidamabaram and Kamal Nath’s son Nakul Nath were elected from the constituencies of Sivaganga in Tamil Nadu and Chhindwara in Madhya Pradesh, respectively. However, Ashok Gehlot’s son Vaibhav Gehlot lost the poll from his home turf of Jodhpur. The Congress ended up winning just 52 seats nationwide, a mere eight seats more than its tally in 2014, which was the lowest tally for the grand old party since Independence.

From the detractors, there were more than taunts to the Congress president on the issue of accountability despite the fact that he had fought a hard battle.

In the backdrop of the Congress debacle, the accusation of the beleaguered party chief might be 100 per cent correct. But at the same time, it is a fact that the three senior leaders have not done anything earthshaking against the interests of the party where the norm among the leaders from top to bottom is virtually to promote their children, whether competent or otherwise.

In fact, whether right or wrong, the DNA of the Congress in the last over half a century has become that of the dynasty — of pushing the progeny of the leader, big or small. When Sonia Gandhi was herself confronted with the dynasty question some 15 years back when Rahul was named the Congress candidate from Amethi, the then Congress president had somewhat angrily countered asking as to why the media was not questioning various regional parties, including the DMK, on the issue.

It meant that the party which brought freedom to the country from British rule by mobilising people from all walks of life under the leadership of Mahatma Gandhi was justifying the role of the ‘family’ by pointing towards regional parties which are dime a dozen.

The first family has dominated the grand old party for more than 60 years. Indira Gandhi was made Congress president in the late 1950s when Jawaharlal Nehru was the Prime Minister. Indira Gandhi, however, institutionalised the practice of having the same person as the party chief and the Prime Minister after the second Congress split of 1969. Rajiv Gandhi continued that practice. Though Sonia Gandhi made Manmohan Singh the Prime Minister from 2004 to 2014, she remained both the Congress president as also the Chairperson of the Congress Parliamentary Party. She has been Chairperson of the UPA since the Congress experiment of sharing power at the Centre began in May 2004. When the question of passing the baton arose, Sonia thought that only Rahul fit the bill.

During 1885-1933, the presidency had a term of one year only. Traditionally, the post rotated among prominent members of the party, successive terms for the same person being frowned upon. Motilal Nehru was Congress president in 1928 and the next year it was Jawaharlal Nehru. During Nehru’s premiership, he rarely held the presidency of the INC.

Though Indira Gandhi’s reign as Prime Minister saw the same person as Congress president and PM after 1969, there were a few other presidents. They included Dev Kant Barooah who was at the helm in 1975 and had famously remarked that ‘Indira is India, India is Indira’.

Her son, Rajiv Gandhi, continued that practice. Rajiv was brought into politics by Indira after the accidental death of Sanjay Gandhi, who was general secretary of the party and a major influence on his mother during the Emergency days.

Sonia Gandhi has created a record by being at the helm of Congress for nearly two decades. She passed on the mantle to Rahul some two years back. Rahul brought Priyanka Gandhi Vadra as party general secretary some three months ago.

It is not that the BJP does not have dynasties in Parliament or the state level, but the spread and the influence of the ‘family’ from top to bottom in the Congress is something which is in another league. The dynasty is both an asset and a liability for the Congress. The Gandhi-Nehru family has been the glue which has helped maintain the unity of the organisation in turbulent times. Loyalists have often used the ‘elective merit’ argument to justify the prime role of the family.

However, the dynasty has made the party increasingly dull and dumb in the changing political times. It has prevented infusion of fresh blood at various levels. Leaders out to promote their progeny have gone out of the way to harm their detractors within the party, leading to nepotism, groupism, internal tussles and sabotage, which has often proved a bane for the organisation.

Dynasty has also given rise to the industry of sycophancy in the party which has resulted in the grass root worker not getting the due and the leadership not getting the clear feedback. It has also stunted the growth of powerful regional leaders in the party. In the days of Nehru, there were umpteen leaders in the states who were leaders in their own right.

In fact, the unwritten philosophy behind the dynasty culture in the Congress, lapped up by other parties, is that if the son of a doctor becomes doctor and lawyer becomes lawyer, then what is wrong if a leader’s son becomes a leader. If Dhirubhai Ambani’s sons dominate the corporate space, then what is wrong in a Gandhi-Nehru doing so?

If Rahul Gandhi remains adamant on his offer of resignation, then the party is in for turbulent times in the short term. But such a move would help the process of metamorphosis of the party at a time when calls for a Congress-mukt Bharat are being made. Narendra Modi’s ‘naamdar vs kaamdar’ rhetoric has hurt the grand old party deeply.

Since the issue of dynasty is inseparable from the Congress culture, Rahul has raised the basic question, unafraid to strike on the root of the matter that had brought him to the top. He that is down need fear no fall.

Rahul is the first Congress leader from the Gandhi-Nehru family in Independent India who has had to establish his leadership through struggle, especially in the past five years. If he plays the gamble, things could lighten up for the Congress at a time when the chaiwala narrative has captured the public imagination. It will show there is much fight left in the oldest political party in the country.
