Meri Durga producer Pradeep Kumar expresses disbelief as police nab show's director for sending death threats

Meri Durga producer Pradeep Kumar (Photo Credit: Free Press Journal)

Meri Durga's producer Pradeep Kumar recently got a piece of shocking news. The producer who had earlier complained about receiving threat calls, finally got to know who was the one behind this cruel act. Though the police caught suspects, much to Pradeep's shock one of the three culprits was his former colleague, Bhupesh Kumar. Bhupesh had directed one of the episodes of the show Meri Durga and the other two accused were identified as cameraman Shashank Suman and Rohan Redkar.

According to a report in Etimes the suspects were nabbed by the Police, this Monday as the cops were able to trace the called. Police Inspector from the Crime Branch, Chimajii Adhav went to the bottom of the case said that Police has arrested the three under sections 385, 387 and 506 (2) (causing a person to fear death or grievous hurt, in order to commit extortion) of the Indian Penal Code. They were produced in the Borivali court on Tuesday.

In an interaction with Bombay Times, the producer revealed his ordeal and said, "The caller threatened to kill me if I did not pay `25 lakh. After that, I did not step out of my house as I was scared. They even threatened to kill my wife, saying that they had been tracking her daily routine. I then approached the Crime Branch with help from my friend, Farid Sama. The case was solved and I was shocked that Bhupesh was behind this."



The producer Pradeep expressed his disbelief and said “I still can’t believe that Bhupesh is behind this. He then added that he and Bhupesh never had any problems, so he can’t understand why the latter would do something like this. The producer revealed that ironically, Bhupesh messaged him on May 21, asking him for work because he did not have any projects on hand.

On the work front, Pradeep Kumar is currently involved with two shows Jaat Naa Puchcho Prem Ki and Choti Sardaarni.
