Revoke suspension of headmaster who criticised you: Delhi minority panel writes to KCR

Revoke suspension of headmaster who criticised you: Delhi minority panel writes to KCR

Lateef Khan, a civil rights activist and also the headmaster of a government school, was suspended for criticizing Telangana Chief Minister KCR ahead of the Telangana Assembly elections.

news Appeal

Two weeks after Lateef Khan, the headmaster of a government high school in Nampally was suspended for criticizing Telangana Chief Minister K Chandrasekhar Rao, the Delhi Minorities Commission Chairman, Zafarul Islam Khan has written to the latter seeking that Lateef’s suspension be revoked. Writing to Telangana CM, Zafarul stated that besides being a headmaster, Lateef Khan is a Human rights activist. Lateef has been working for the welfare of Muslims for nearly two decades.

In his letter dated, May 23, Zafarul wrote, “Mr. Lateef Khan, besides being a teacher, is also a reputed human rights activist known in India and abroad. Moreover, as a citizen of a free and democratic country, he is entitled to speak his mind. Rather, he should be encouraged to do so. Telangana should be proud of having such citizens who stand out and act as the conscience of the people.”

Slamming the action of the Regional Joint Director, who suspended Lateef, Zafarul added, “I think the said action has been taken by some overzealous officer who is oblivious of the democratic rights of a free country.”

“It is my request that the misplaced action against Mr Lateef Khan is withdrawn and his services to the human rights in Telangana and beyond are recognised,” Zafarul said in the letter.

On May 15, Lateef was suspended from his job on the grounds of violating the Model Code of Conduct ahead of the Assembly elections in Telangana. Lateef had published a video on YouTube ‘KCR exposed’ in November, advising the viewers against voting for KCR as he had failed to fulfil the promises he made before assuming power in 2014.

In the video, which he had shared on Facebook as well, Lateef had listed out various promises made by KCR – like making a Dalit the Chief Minister, giving 12% reservation to Muslims in employment and education, free education from KG-PG and employment opportunities for 50,000 students etc. – which he said still remained unfulfilled.

Taking objection to this, an anonymous complaint was made after the TRS government came back to power, following which Lateef was suspended. Earlier speaking to TNM, Lateef said that he would fight the arbitrary decision of the School Education Department in the High Court.

Read: Hyderabad school headmaster suspended for video criticising Telangana CM KCR
