Cold wave warning issued for Telangana, Andhra for next few days

Cold wave warning issued for Telangana, Andhra for next few days

The IMD in their weather warning has stated that the temperatures can drop to below 10 degree Celsius in parts of Telangana and Andhra.

news Weather

A severe cold wave warning has been issued for Telangana for the next five days while parts of Andhra Pradesh will experience a cold wave for the next three days. The Indian Meteorological Department (IMD) on Tuesday released a five-day forecast issuing a 2-day orange alert for Telangana and a three-day yellow alert for Andhra Pradesh.

Telangana capital city, Hyderabad on Monday recorded temperatures as low as 6.6 degree Celsius at the automatic weather station at Telangana State Development Planning Society (TSDPS) in BHEL factory, reported The New Indian Express. This beats the lowest temperature of 8.9-degree Celsius last recorded on December 21, 2010, by the Meteorological Department in Hyderabad.

The IMD in their weather warning has issued an orange alert for eight districts. These districts can expect a cold wave where temperatures could drop below 10 degree Celsius on both Tuesday and Wednesday. The orange alert has been issued for Adilabad, Nirmal, Warangal Rural, Medak, Peddapalle, Komarambheem and Mancherial districts.

Districts with orange alerts will switch to a yellow alert from Thursday.

The IMD has issued a yellow warning of a cold wave for some districts on Thursday, Friday and Saturday. The cold wave is expected to affect Asifabad, Nirmal, Hyderabad, Rangareddy, Karimnagar, Kamareddy, Siddipet, Bhupalpally, Warangal(Urban), Nizamabad, Khammam, Jayashankar Bhupalpalli, and Kothagudem districts.

In Adilabad’s Arli village temperatures as low as 2.7 degree Celsius was recorded by the TSDPS. Both Asifabad and Adilabad saw temperatures fluctuating between 2 to 5 degree Celsius. Districts such as Warangal and Ramagundam also saw temperatures remain below 9 degree Celsius. Though the temperatures will remain low, there will be no rainfall for the next five days, predicted the IMD.

In Andhra Pradesh, the Meteorological Department has predicted a three-day cold wave for districts along coastal Andhra Pradesh. Temperatures are expected to drop below 10 degree Celsius at Srikakulam, Vizianagaram, Visakhapatnam, East Godavari and West Godavari districts.
