Modi leading India is God's plan: Shiv Sena's Saamana hails Modi, attacks TIME for 'U-turn'

Modi leading India is God's plan: Shiv Sena hails Modi attacks TIME for 'U-turn' I Photo credit: @ShivSena | Photo Credit: Twitter

Mumbai: The Bharatiya Janata Party’s (BJP’s) ally Shiv Sena mouthpiece Saamana dubbed Modi leading the country as part of "God’s plan”. In a takedown of the TIME magazine which carried a cover story labelling Modi as India’s ‘divider-in-chief’, an editorial in Saamana said the US-based magazine has now taken a U-turn.

After National Democratic Alliance’s (NDA’s) massive victory on May 23, the US-based magazine published another article titled, “Modi has united India like no Prime Minister in Decades” which Saamana dubbed as a “U-turn”.

“Modi leading this country again is God's plan. TIME magazine which called him divider in chief has now taken a U turn. There are many issues in front of the country but Modi has the conviction to break through those issues. He was Chowkidar and Pradhan sewak till yesterday, he has now undertaken the role of the guardian of the country. His oath taking is God's plan to make the country strong,” a recent article in Shiv Sena-owned said.

After May 23 landslide verdict for Narendra Modi-led NDA, the US-based magazine published yet another article that says no Indian prime minister united the country like Modi.

In the article titled, ‘Modi Has United India Like No Prime Minister in Decades’ penned by Manoj Ladwa, London-based founder of and chief executive of India Inc group, a media company.

Ladwa writes "a key factor is that Modi has managed to transcend India's greatest fault line: the class divide".

In yet another strong editorial published last week, Saamana took an aim at Congress president Rahul Gandhi in an analysis of BJP-led NDA’s massive victory in the recently concluded general elections.

The editorial, analysing its ally Bharatiya Janata Party (BJP’s) landslide victory, slammed Congress president Rahul Gandhi and praised the ‘organisation building abilities’ of Modi and Shah.

Rahul Gandhi is surrounded by “dynasts or pensioners’ club” said the article taking a jibe at Congress' old guard and the political families in the party fold.

“Modi has created an atmosphere of Hindu nationalism in the country. After Pulwama and Balakot the country is teeming with patriotism while Rahul Gandhi was busy criticising freedom fighter Savarkar. Rahul resigned as Congress president but his party won’t accept it. What will happen to such a party in question,” the article says.

The Shiv Sena-BJP alliance won an astounding 41 out of 48 seats in Maharashtra in the 2019 general elections repeating its 2014 performance. In 2014, the BJP won 23 seats while Shiv Sena won 18 seats.


