No more swimming in Ganga canal, say cops; violators to be fined

GHAZIABAD: In view of several cases of drowning reported in the Ganga canal , senior superintendent of police (SSP) Upendra Kumar Agrawal has put a ban on people entering the water body and directed SHOs of Muradnagar and Masuri on Tuesday to issue challans to people who violate the order and also seize their vehicles.Every year in summer, hundreds from people from NCR and other neighbouring districts come here to swim in the canal. The number increases manifold on weekend and on holidays. A majority of them also consume alcohol on the bank and keeping a tab on such activities is an uphill task for the local authorities.Since the start of 2019 at least five people have drowned in the canal in Muradnagar and Masuri. Following the order, several police patrolling teams have been deployed near the canal and are being issued warning against entering the water body. However, those who are visiting the temples built on the bank of the canal and taking a dip in the holy water will not be stopped the police clarified.SSP Agrawal said, “Efforts are being made to stop people from entering the dangerous zone on the water body. A lot of people after consuming alcohol enter the deeper part of the canal and drown due to the high current. It is being done for their safety. The rumours that devotees who are going to the temple and taking a dip in the canal are being stopped by the police, this is completely untrue.”Police said, violators will be fined under Section 34 of the Police Act for endangering lives. Moreover, their vehicles will be seized as well. SHO (Masuri) OP Singh said on Tuesday, nine vehicles were seized and 12 were fined. Meanwhile, the body of Asif (23), a resident of Sahibabad, who had come to swim in Ganga canal with his friends on Sunday afternoon, but drowned when he entered the deep part of the canal, was recovered on Wednesday. Teams of local divers and NDRF had been conducting the search and rescue operation.
