‘I hate BJP! I hate BJP! I hate BJP!’: Mamata vows ‘revenge’ against BJP; forms new brigade to counter RSS

Mamata Banerjee, West Bengal CM

Kolkata: In an emotional outburst, West Bengal chief minister and Trinamool Congress (TMC) supremo Mamata Banerjee on Thursday declared that she “hates BJP” and vowed “revenge” against the Bharatiya Janata Party (BJP) after the alleged poll violence against TMC workers post the Lok Sabha election results.

A furious Banerjee addressed workers today as she sat on a dharna in front of Naihati municipality in Kolkata to protest against the post-poll violence which purportedly left several TMC workers "homeless."

The TMC chief alleged that she was “attacked” while she was on her way to address the workers, many of whom burst into tears at the sight of her. However, she stated that she has “fought all her life” and would not “succumb to threats”.

As per news agency PTI, when Mamata was moving towards the venue of the sit-in, a group of men shouted "Jai Shri Ram" as her motorcade was passing through the troubled Bhatpara area of North 24 Parganas district.

In an emotionally-charged speech, Banerjee told the workers, “I hate BJP! I hate BJP! I hate BJP! I honour and respect the culture of Bengal. Few goons have taken advantage of the Model Code of Conduct (MCC). I will not spare anyone.” She added,” I don't live under the mercy of Modi or the central government.”

“When I was coming here today few of them came to attack me. I am telling you I have fought and even braved bullets all my life. I will not succumb. I will not forget anything,” an agitated Banerjee said. The West Bengal CM further added, “Those who came and abused me today, I could have arrested them - but I didn't. If they don't behave properly then the law will take its own course. I will not change my slogan. I will not say what they are asking me to. My slogan is Jai Hind.”

In a blistering attack, Banerjee also warned PM Modi against attempting to have President's Rule imposed on West Bengal, saying that if he tried to muzzle her government's voice, "no one will be a bigger enemy than me."

In what can be construed as controversial statements inciting violence, the TMC chief appeared to advocate violence against rivals, asserting that she will "take revenge." She said, "I don't want violence. But what if you get hit like the way you are attacking others. I know where you live. I know what you do... Don’t forget that.”

Clarifying her statement, she further said, “There is a famous dialogue of a film "I will hit you here and the body will fall there". Don't worry. I can't say 'body'. I will say I will hit you here and justice will happen there."

#WATCH North 24 Parganas: West Bengal CM Mamata Banerjee gets off her car and confronts people chanting 'Jai Shri Ram' slogans, Banerjee says'These are all outsiders and BJP people, they are criminals and were abusing me. They are not from Bengal.' pic.twitter.com/haGjQmQYlv — ANI (@ANI) May 30, 2019

Stating her intent to take revenge against the BJP, Banerjee, fondly known as ‘Didi’, said that she “wanted revenge” and that “enough is enough.” She asserted that BJP’s claims that its party workers were killed in post-poll violence were “pure lies”.

The BJP has invited (to New Delhi) families of BJP workers who were allegedly killed in post-poll violence in Bengal. "They are calling it political violence. I condemn such lies. Not a single person was killed. Today they are saying another person has been killed. I am telling it's false. Pure lies. It was a family fight over a trivial issue."

The TMC chief also said that she would set up a Jai Hind Bahini brigade to counter the Rashtriya Swayamsevak Sangh (RSS) in Bengal. In a message to PM Narendra Modi ahead of his swearing-in ceremony in New Delhi later in the evening, Banerjee said, “Our fight will continue.”

In the 2019 Lok Sabha election, the ruling TMC faced a setback after the BJP managed to make inroads in the state, winning 18 Lok Sabha seats. On the other hand, TMC won 22 seats out of a total of 42 Lok Sabha seats in West Bengal.


