Major cyclone kills three in India, Bangladesh

PURI, India: At least three people died Friday (May 3) as Cyclone Fani, the biggest in years, slammed into eastern India, sending coconut trees flying and cutting off power, water and telecommunications.

The monster weather system, which made landfall at the eastern holy city of Puri in the morning, is one of the strongest to come in off the Indian Ocean in years, with winds gusting at speeds of up to 200kph.

In recent days authorities in Odisha state, where 10,000 people died in a 1999 cyclone, have evacuated more than a million people as they fret about a possible 1.5-metre storm surge sweeping far inland.

One man died of a heart attack in one of several thousand shelters that have been set up.

Media reports put the death toll at up to six, but officials could not confirm this.



"Another person went out in the storm despite our warnings and died because a tree fell on him," Odisha special relief commissioner Bishnupada Sethi told AFP.

"The winds outside right now must be around 200 kph," he said by phone from Odisha state capital Bhubaneswar.

Authorities in Bangladesh, where Fani was headed, said a woman was killed, also by a tree, and that 14 villages were inundated as flood dams broke due to a tidal surge.

Disaster management spokesman Mohammad Jahir told AFP that 400,000 people from Bangladeshi coastal villages have been taken to shelters.

Hundreds of thousands more people in India's West Bengal state have also been given orders to flee. Local airports have been shut, while train lines and roads were closed.

"It just went dark and then suddenly we could barely see five metres in front of us," said one Puri resident.

"There were the roadside food carts, store signs all flying by in the air," the man told AFP from a hotel where he took shelter. "The wind is deafening."

Another witness said he saw a small car being pushed along a street by the winds and then turned over.

"We have been unable to make contact with our team in Puri for some time now to get the latest update about the situation there," H.R. Biswas, Indian Meteorology Department director in state capital Bhubaneswar, told AFP.


