Karnataka anganwadi workers protest introduction of Kindergarten classes in govt schools

BENGALURU: Around 5, 000 anganwadi workers from all over Karnataka on Thursday staged a protest near Freedom Park against the government’s decision to start Kindergarten (UKG and LKG) classes in government schools.They have also demanded a hike in their salaries.Government’s order to move 4,100 anganwadi centres to schools has not gone down well with thousands of Anganwadi workers who gathered in the city.“We can care for and teach children who are 2-year-old until they turn 5-year-old. The government must start the Kindergarten classes within the anganwadi centres instead of moving the centres. What will we be left to do?,” said Vidya Vaidya, an Anganwadi worker from Sirsi district who also heads the anganwadi association in the district.“We have been waiting in the sweltering heat, travelling from different districts for the sake of our livelihood. The ministers have kept us waiting. We wonder if they would do the same if they were invited to inaugurate a fancy shopping-mall,” Vidya said. Another anganwadi worker, Janaki added that they left their children and families back in their villages to fight for their rights. “These types of decisions will mean a slow death of the 45-year-old scheme,” Janaki said.Around 1,000 women and 500 men security forces are deployed in Freedom Park to foresee that there is no violence.Many workers told TOI that they were adamant on continuing their protest without food. “anganwadi plays the role of a Mother but the government shows nothing but disrespect,” one of the anganwadi workers said.S Varalakshmi, president of Karnataka State Anganwadi Workers’ Association, said that children would miss out on nutrition, which is the basic objective of anganwadi centres. “We are already working in an to nurture and teach kids. Why should the government make another institute for the kids, where would the staff of the current anganwadi centres go?” she asked“In my 27 years of my work it feels like the government pays us the way biscuits are thrown at dogs,” P M Munirathamma, a 49-year-old anganwadi worker from Chikkaballapura said.They also claimed that there had been multiple schemes that are sanctioned by the government but none of them operated as promised. Moreover, the ruling party reduced the Anganwadi welfares budget by 50 per cent, they said.“The government prefers, educated, English speaking teachers to teach the students A, B, C, D, but wants us to do other menial jobs,” Subharekha, an Anganwadi teacher rued.(With inputs from Mohit D Jain, Kiran Gowdara)
