Register housing projects or face action: Jharkhand Rera

Ranchi: Jharkhand’s Real Estate Regulatory Authority ( RERA ), a state-level watchdog for real estate sector, on Thursday set a three-month deadline to real estate agents, promoters and developers operating in Jharkhand to compulsorily register their ongoing projects with them, or face punitive actions.In sync with Centre’s guidelines to streamline the real estate sector, Jharkhand notified RERA in 2017 after devising its own rules in tune with Real Estate (Regulation and Development) Act 2016. Since then, sources told TOI that two advisories were served to real estate promoters, building and developers for seeking compulsory registration of their works. However, vis-à-vis the massive construction boom in Ranchi and elsewhere in the state, the response so far has been unsatisfactory.“Therefore, we are now giving a final three month window to all such erring building/promoters to register their projects with us failing which the Authority will initiate crackdown,” said Niraj Kumar Srivastava, chief administrative officer of RERA, Jharkhand.On the nature of punitive action, he said, “Under section 3(1) of Real Estate (Regulation and Development) Act 2016, more than 50 percent of the cost of registration will be charged on each builder/developer besides other legal actions enshrined under the rules.”Figures available from the Authority suggested that so far 100 projects have been registered with RERA across the state. “But the number of ongoing projects could be several times more as the Authority has been receiving regular complains from aggrieved customers. Registration of the projects will also serve as a database of the projects underway in the state,” he added.Another official, on anonymity, said that the reason why RERA hasn’t considered crackdown until now is because of logistical and administrative issues. “After notification of RERA, it took some time for it to become fully functional due to manpower issues, formation of a tribunal and appellate for hearing and disposal of cases etc. Now, with all those ground works over, focus is on to strengthen and streamline its functioning to meet its objective with which it is formed,” said another official.According to Srivastava, they have also started taking hearing on complaints from aggrieved parties. So far 70 cases have been registered, mostly from customers who invested in real estates. “Hearings are underway to dispose them. Recently, as many as 10 people (customers) lodged complaints against a company named Ananya construction for failing to give them their houses on time. We had imposed heavy fines on the said building,” he said, but couldn’t specify the amounts.
