Met dept issues red-colour warning for Delhi as heat wave grips North India

Girls cover their faces to protect themselves from sun stroke. (REUTERS FILE/Jitendra Prakash)

The air shimmers, eyes burn and tongue is a strip of sand paper...in the heart of Delhi it's like you are in the middle of the Thar.

Rising temperatures are literally frazzling the brains in the National Capital Region (NCR) as well as large swathes of North India. And this is just the beginning.

On Friday, the capital sizzled at 44.8° Celsius with humidity at a low 20-59 per cent. "Heat wave at many places. Severe heat wave at isolated pockets reported in the Delhi-NCR region," the India Meteorological (Met) Department said.

On Thursday, the mercury touched 46.8° Celsius in Delhi -- the highest in May since 2013. The Met office has issued a red-colour warning for NCR as heat-wave conditions grip North India.

According to news agency PTI, the Met department has four colour-coded warnings: green, yellow, amber and red with green indicating normal temperatures and red extreme weather situations.

In Delhi the mercury is likely to touch a maximum of 45° Celsius and a minimum of 29° Celsius on Saturday.

It is not just Delhi and its neighbouring areas that are reeling from severe heat wave conditions. On Thursday, the maximum temperature in Prayagraj (earlier called Allahabad) rose to 48.6° Celsius. According to private forecaster Skymet Weather, this is the highest maximum temperature in 25 years. Back in 1994 the highest was 48.4° Celsius.

Heat wave conditions are likely to continue till at least Tuesday over North and Northwest India including Delhi, Haryana, Punjab, Rajasthan and west Uttar Pradesh.

A worker drinks water as another looks on, on a hot summer day. (Photo: REUTERS)

Heat wave is declared when the maximum temperature touches 45° Celsius for two consecutive days in large areas and severe heat wave when it touches 47° Celsius.

However in smaller areas such as Delhi and its neighbouring region, heat wave is declared when the maximum temperature reaches 45° Celsius.

Clear skies and dry northwesterly winds will raise day temperatures in Delhi and large parts of North India. According to The Weather Channel, "heat-wave conditions will peak on Monday and continue until Tuesday".

Relief is at least a few weeks away as the monsoon will not reach North India till mid-June at the earliest, forecasters have predicted. Worse is that the monsoon will have a weak beginning.

More bad news: across India the air quality remains poor.
