Economy in crutches, 'Nirmala Sitharaman is in the hot seat', says senior journalist

Guruswamy added that the government will have to put money to productive use instead of spending it on itself.

New Delhi: Within 24 hours of its formation, the new government has come across difficult challenges. According to reports, the country has seen a reduction in its GDP while the growth of core sector industries has also slowed down. With the GDP below 6 per cent, unemployment rate is soaring its highest in comparison to the last 45 years.

With two massive blows, the country is yet to understand why and where the government went wrong. With its GDP below 6 per cent for the first time in five years, India's coveted title of being the world's fastest growing economy has now been claimed by China.

India's GDP growth falls below 6%. Unemployment rate highest in 45 years.



Since there is no denying that there is a slowdown, what solutions are available to the govt to make sure that the country gets back on its feet as soon as possible?@fayedsouza pic.twitter.com/LvHRoakJiV — Mirror Now (@MirrorNow) May 31, 2019

While the industrial sector is grovelling in the dust and is struggling to get back on its feet, the woes of the farmers seem to be never-ending. An economy that once prospered on its agricultural sector, India has now seen the nightmare of a negative growth in the same sector. The farm sector is said to have recorded a shocking growth of '-0.01' per cent according to recent reports.

.@neerjachowdhury, Senior Journalist: It needs a completely holistic plan & a will to address these issues on an expeditious basis. You need the killer instinct & determination. That has to come from the govt & Nirmala Sitharaman is only a vehicle pic.twitter.com/FCiBscYbvi — Mirror Now (@MirrorNow) May 31, 2019

Senior Journalist Neerja Chowdhary stated that repeated warnings from economists and experts were proof that 'livelihood was in danger". Chowdhary also stated that "Nirmala Sitharaman is in the hot seat and in an unenviable position".

Chowdhary stated that in order to combat the financial crisis looming over the country, Sitharaman will have to work closely with the Prime Minister's Office and will have to make judicious decisions for the entire country.

.@mohanguruswamy, Senior Economist: We have to cut down govt expenditure, cut down subsidies, sell a lot of unproductive assets in the public sector, bring the money in and put it to productive use. But what you've got is the govt spending money on itself pic.twitter.com/G1ecbRrybg — Mirror Now (@MirrorNow) May 31, 2019

Giving solutions for the ongoing crisis, Mohan Guruswamy, senior economist, compared the Indian economy to a "giant ship". According to Guruswamy, turning around a situation like this spans for at least two to three years. Guruswamy added that the government will have to put money to productive use instead of spending it on itself.

Prof. R. Nagaraj, Economist: The GDP numbers combined with the jobs data numbers are really worrying & it confirms some of the worst fears many of us have. The situation is very grave. pic.twitter.com/an5ez4bWmr — Mirror Now (@MirrorNow) May 31, 2019

Professor R Nagaraj, an economist stated that the GDP numbers of the country combined with the job data are "worrying". Nagaraj stated that the "quarterly number of 5.8 per cent is confirming" that the economy has seen a deceleration.

Is there a question in the timing? Was the data withheld until after the elections was over? @fayedsouza asks BJP's @syedzafarBJP pic.twitter.com/A2Wpnd3gaj — Mirror Now (@MirrorNow) May 31, 2019

Defending his party, BJP's Syed Zafar Islam denied that the economy is not in good shape. He stated that apart from the last two quarters, the economy has not faced any challenges. On being asked why the government rubbished the initial data published by various agencies, Zafar Islam stated that such questions are pointless. He added that the timing of the release of the data should not be speculated about since it was not foolproof initially.

With a fractured economy in its hands, the BJP government is yet to come up with ways to answer the questions hurled at it on its first day of existence.


