Confessions of a serial book recommender

In my kitchen is a box of chamomile tea that’s flavoured with someone’s guilt. My dear sweet colleague Nitya Chablani (Digital Features Editor, Vogue India) once asked me to suggest a book for her to read. I told her about Rachel Cusk’s brilliant Outline, the first book in her Faye trilogy—books, which in their complete dismantling of the structure of a novel, opened a whole new literary world for me. Not only did I recommend it to her, I even fished it out of my bookshelf and lent it to her the very next day. The book stayed with her a month or two. Once or twice, in my enthusiasm about finding someone who would read Rachel Cusk and love her the way I did, I would ask Nitya how much progress she had made. “Oh it’s nice,” she told me, “but I’m just really trying to find the time.” Pretty soon, even accidental eye contact at work would have her squealing, “I’m reading it, I’m reading it!”, which then progressed to “Please don’t judge me!” She tortured herself another month, after which, feeling bad—either about having one third of my trilogy or about not meeting it with the enthusiasm that she thought I expected—she returned it along with the said chamomile tea. Despite her agony, it wasn’t such a bad ending as far as I was concerned—Outline, Transit and Kudos have been safely reunited—though my Rachel Cusk book club will have to wait.

Another friend who wanted a book to get back to heavy-duty read after a long-ish break got Rachel Kushner’s Mars Room—and Maggie Nelson’s Bluets so there would be no in-between bookless phase before she figured her next one. Someone has my anniversary edition copy of Gerald Durrell’s My Family And Other Animals (not cool), another Gillian Flynn’s Sharp Objects or Dark Places (don’t care that much).

I am not magnanimous by nature as far as sharing my belongings is concerned. There’s a running joke at work about how attached I am to my office stapler. (I am not.) The former art director once fake stole it and then created an email account from which “Shalini Stapler” would send me pictures of the said inanimate object enjoying a beer, going on a coffee run, posing in front of Gateway for India (“Does this make me look like a tourist?”), lying among the coffee beans at Starbucks… the works. So, no, I don’t share things unless I trust the sharee to return them promptly, unprompted and undamaged.
