Police now reopen probe into gau rakshak’s death

BELAGAVI: After police declared that the death of gau rakshak Shivkumar Uppar of Ankalagi village, Gokak taluk, wasn’t murder but suicide , right-wing outfits and BJP leaders stepped up pressure on them to reinvestigate the case. Now, they’re reinvestigating it from different angles.DCP (law & order) Seema Latkar said, “The post mortem report confirmed that Shivkumar’s death was a suicide. However, the investigation is not complete and we’re looking at why he committed suicide, among other things.”BJP leaders and right-wing activists rushed to Uppar’s residence and many are assisting the family financially. A local leader assured them he’d give the family half a gunta of land and Vijayapura MLA Basavaraj Patil (Yatnal), Belagavi MLAs Abhay Patil and Anil Benake promised they’d ensure construction of a new house there.On Thursday, Purushottamanand Swamiji of the Uppar community visited Shivkumar’s house and handed over an undisclosed sum of money to his family. He also urged police to ensure justice for the family.Refer case to CBI: MutalikHundreds of Shri Rama Sena workers led by Pramod Mutalik protested at the Belagavi deputy commissioner’s office on Friday and demanded that the case be handed over to the CBI. Mutalik alleged that some influential personalities were trying to get the case closed. He expressed disappointment over the arrest of Hindu activists who claimed on social media that Shivkumar had been murdered. He asked why police hadn’t taken similar action against Union minister of state Suresh Angadi and MP Shobha Karandlaje for tweeting similar comments.Reveal truth within seven days: YatnalOn Friday, Basavaraj Patil (Yatnal) set police a deadline of seven days to unearth the truth and if that didn’t happen, gau rakshaks across the state would protest. He alleged that police are under pressure to suppress the truth. “This shows an anti-Hindu attitude of Congress and JD(S) and because of that, people taught them a lesson in the recent Lok Sabha elections,” he said. He also demanded Rs 10 lakh compensation for Shivkumar’s family.Belagavi (North) MLA Anil Benake said there are many things which indicate it wasn’t suicide but murder and police must investigate the issue.
