Sonia Gandhi elected as Congress party head in Parliament

Sonia Gandhi elected as Congress party head in Parliament

The Congress is yet to decide who will lead the party in the Lok Sabha.

news Politics

It will be 72-year-old Sonia Gandhi who will lead the Congress parliamentarians in the 17th Lok Sabha again. The former Congress Party President was elected unanimously on Saturday morning to the post of Leader of the Congress Parliamentary Party.

Sonia being elected comes a week after Rahul Gandhi, her son and present Congress President, announced his decision to quit the post. Soon after being elected, Sonia reportedly thanked "12.13 crore voters for reposing faith in the Congress Party".

Congratulations to Smt Sonia Gandhi on being elected Leader of the Congress Parliamentary Party. Under her leadership, the Congress will prove to be a strong & effective opposition party, that will fight to defend the Constitution of India. pic.twitter.com/iUcdB51tHE June 1, 2019

Smt. Sonia Gandhi elected as the leader of Congress Parliamentary Party!



She says, ‘we thank the 12.13 Cr voters for reposing faith in the Congress Party’. pic.twitter.com/H4z9i3dN8B — Randeep Singh Surjewala (@rssurjewala) June 1, 2019

The Congress won just 52 of the 543 Lok Sabha seats in the recently concluded General Elections. In the first Congress Working Committee (CWC) meeting after the results, Rahul had announced his decision to quit as party president, taking moral responsibility for the party’s defeat.

The party is currently short of three members that would allow it to qualify for the post of Leader of Opposition. The party was unable to make that cut even in the 2014 elections.

Mallikarjun Kharge, who faced a surprise defeat in the Lok Sabha elections from the Kalaburagi constituency in Karnataka, was the Leader of the Congress and the UPA in the 16th Lok Sabha. The Congress, however, is yet to decide who will be the party leader in the Lok Sabha.

Sonia was reelected from her Rae Bareli parliamentary seat in Uttar Pradesh. Her seat was the lone seat that the Congress managed to win in Uttar Pradesh, with party chief Rahul Gandhi losing to BJP’s Smriti Irani from Amethi.

Those observing the party expect a new face to take on the mantle of Leader of the Congress in the Lok Sabha. In an interview to NDTV on Tuesday, Congress leader Shashi Tharoor, the three-time MP of Thiruvananthapuram constituency, had expressed his hope to get a call for the job. He had stated that he was ready to take up any additional responsibility in Parliament. “I cannot determine things regarding positions of the party in Parliament, the Congress party will have to decide on that. But I am available to take up any additional responsibility in Parliament,” said Tharoor.

Rahul Gandhi also addressed the Saturday meeting where he reportedly told the gathered Parlimentarians to "fight for the Constitution, for every person in India irrespective of the colour of his skin or belief." This was the first official meet by Rahul after his decision to quit as the Congress party chief.
