'We Have 52 Lawmakers and We Will Fight the BJP Every Day': Rahul Gandhi

(Image source from: Twitter.com/rssurjewala)

'We Have 52 Lawmakers and We Will Fight the BJP Every Day': Rahul Gandhi:- Congress president Rahul Gandhi today said the Congress may have just 52 Members of Parliament in the Lok Sabha but they are strong enough to take on the Bharatiya Janata Party [which has 303 members].

Speaking at the Congress Parliamentary Party (CPP) meeting, Rahul Gandhi said, "We are 52 MPs. I guarantee you that these 52 MPs will fight against BJP every single inch. We are enough to make BJP jump everyday."

"Every Congress member must remember that each one of you is fighting for the Constitution, for every person in India irrespective of the color of his skin or belief," Rahul Gandhi said.

Speaking about BJP lawmakers, Rahul Gandhi said, "They use hatred and anger to fight us...you are going to enjoy. [We] have to be aggressive. Time to introspect and rejuvenate."

This is the first time that Rahul Gandhi has attacked the BJP after the Congress was routed in the 2019 Lok Sabha elections.

Meanwhile, UPA chairperson Sonia Gandhi was elected as the Congress Parliamentary Party (CPP) leader today in New Delhi. Congress president Rahul Gandhi and Sonia Gandhi attended the CPP meeting.

The meeting was also attended by all 52 newly elected Lok Sabha MPs of the Congress alongwith the party's Rajya Sabha MPs. The Congress leaders met to elect the party's new CPP leader. Previously the post was held by Sonia Gandhi.

In a tweet, Rahul Gandhi said the Congress will prove to be a "strong and effective" opposition party under the leadership of Sonia Gandhi.

Congratulations to Smt Sonia Gandhi on being elected Leader of the Congress Parliamentary Party. Under her leadership, the Congress will prove to be a strong & effective opposition party, that will fight to defend the Constitution of India. pic.twitter.com/iUcdB51tHE — Rahul Gandhi (@RahulGandhi) June 1, 2019

The Congress party has authorized Sonia Gandhi to appoint the party's leader in the Lok Sabha.

In the 16th Lok Sabha, the post was held by senior Congress leader Mallikarjun Kharge.

However, Kharge failed to win the Lok Sabha election this time. He contested from Gulbarga, Karnataka. In his absence, Congress has limited options for this post.

Winning just 52 seats, the Congress suffered its second most humiliating defeat in the 2019 Lok Sabha election. The worst was in 2014 when it won 44 seats.

The Congress's poor tally in the house does not qualify it for the post of Leader of Opposition in the Lok Sabha.

During the Congress Working Committee meeting on May 25, Congress president Rahul Gandhi had offered to resign as party president. His offer to resign was however rejected by the CWC members.

Sonia Gandhi now has the task to find a suitable Congress MP who can lead the party in the Lok Sabha.

By Sowmya
