Sri Lanka : Sri Lanka President says presidential elections scheduled for December 7

Leading News from Sri Lanka::

* Sri Lanka President says presidential elections scheduled for December 7

Sat, Jun 1, 2019, 12:13 pm SL Time, ColomboPage News Desk, Sri Lanka.

June 01, Colombo: Sri Lanka President Maithripala Sirisena has said that the Presidential Election has been scheduled for 7 December but he had not made up his mind about contesting.

"None of the political parties have selected candidates. I am not in a hurry to make up my mind," he told the Indian media on the sidelines of a meeting of BIMSTEC nations at Hyderabad House in New Delhi, according to a report in The Hindu.

Speaking on the Easter Sunday attacks by radical Islamic suicide bombers which led to the death of over 250 people, President Sirisena said that Sri Lanka had not received any reports of the attackers visiting India.

The President reiterated his charge that he was kept in the dark about intelligence reports on an impending attack. India had warned Sri Lanka about the attacks three times.

"I was in Singapore at the time of the attacks. A clear report had been sent by Indian intelligence agencies on 4 April to Sri Lanka. Correspondence had taken place between defense chiefs. However, from 4 to 16 April, the day I left to Singapore, none of the chiefs informed me about this. I would have not left the country had I known it. I removed the Defense Secretary and Police Chief because of this grave shortcoming," Sirisena said.

On the ongoing investigations, the President said: "We have received support of intelligence organizations of friendly countries - India, US and UK - came to help us. Foreign policy of Sri Lanka relies on neutrality - we prefer mediation in resolving differences."

On the attacks on Muslims following the blasts, Sirisena said: "We assure security for all groups in Sri Lanka. We are a vibrant democracy like India. Security and safety of all citizens will be ensured by my Government and no community will be targeted."

"All democratic countries should join hands as terrorism hurts all countries. The objective of terrorism is to break bonds. However, in Sri Lanka the situation is under control. We have stability and peace in the country," Sirisena said.

Tourists have started returning to the country, the President claimed.

The President said that people all over the world were congratulating Prime Minister Modi for rising to safeguard Indian democracy. Sri Lanka is looking forward to his visit on 9 June, Sirisena added. (Source: The Hindu)
