Amit Shah pulls up MoS Home G Kishan Reddy for calling Hyderabad terror haven

Union home minister Amit Shah has reportedly pulled up his junior minister G Kishan Reddy for his controversial remark on terrorism. Earlier in the day, G Kishan Reddy, who is the Minister of State for home affairs, had termed Hyderabad as a haven for terror activities.

"There are places in the country where terror activities are on a rise. If an incident takes place in Bengaluru or Bhopal, its roots are traced to Hyderabad. State police and the National Investigation Agency (NIA) have arrested terrorists in Hyderabad every two-three months," G Kishan Reddy was quoted as saying by news agency ANI.

MoS (Home) G Kishan Reddy: There are places in country where terror activities are on a rise. If an incident takes place in Bengaluru, Bhopal, its roots are traced to Hyderabad. State police, NIA have arrested terrorists in Hyderabad every 2-3 months. I didn't say anything wrong. pic.twitter.com/EWvQiHJ8V9 ANI (@ANI) June 1, 2019

The news agency quoted Reddy saying "I [Reddy] didn't say anything wrong".

Sources have told India Today TV that Union home minister Amit Shah has pulled by Reddy for his comment.

We, however, do not know what exactly Shah told Reddy on his remarks. Amit Shah took charge as home minister today and chaired his first meeting in the home ministry.

Meanwhile, reacting to Reddy's comment Lok Sabha MP from Hyderabad Asaduddin Owaisi said, "I would like to ask him [Reddy] that in last five years how many times did NIA, IB and RAW gave in writing that Hyderabad is a safe zone for terror? It is unfortunate the he is saying such things."

Owaisi termed the minister's statement "ïrresponsible". He also accused the BJP of having "hatred" for Muslims and targeting them.

"An MoS speaking like this! This shows their hatred for Telangana, Hyderabad. Such irresponsible statements don't suit a minister, but we expect this from him. Wherever they see Muslims, they take them for terrorists. We can't cure them."

Asaduddin Owaisi, AIMIM: Since past 5 yrs there is peace here, there are no communal riots, religious festivals are peacefully celebrated, it is a growing city and he is speaking like that. What enmity do they have with Telangana, Hyderabad? Do they not like that it is growing? https://t.co/s6fveylyVj ANI (@ANI) June 1, 2019

In his first address to newly elected BJP MPs, Prime Minister Narendra Modi had cautioned his MPs from giving unsubstantiated comments. He had said that such comments tarnish the government's image and triggers unwarranted controversies.

Meanwhile, the Telangana Rashtriya Samiti, the ruling party in Telangana, said calling state capital Hyderabad a terror-safe zone sends out a wrong message.

"The statements given by the newly appointed Minister of State for Home G Kishan Reddy categorising Hyderabad as a safe zone for terror sends a very wrong signal to investors and businesses which are planning to invest in the state," TRS leader Abid Rasool Khan told ANI.

ALSO READ | Amit Shah takes charge as home minister: 5 challenges he faces ahead

ALSO READ | Can Amit Shah help fix the Kashmir issue?
