Jammu & Kashmir Governor Satya Pal Malik meets Home Minister Amit Shah, apprises him on Kashmir situation

Home Minister Amit Shah with J&K Governor Satya Pal Malik

New Delhi: Jammu and Kashmir Governor Satya Pal Malik met Union Home Minister Amit Shah today and briefed him about the security situation in the state, which has been under the President's rule since December 2018.

Both Shah and Malik also held discussions on the law and order situation in the Kashmir Valley and the border areas besides various development issues in the state.

On the issue of holding assembly elections in the state, the Governor said that it was not discussed as the matter was under the purview of the Election Commission of India.

Meanwhile, the President's rule in Jammu and Kashmir has been extended beyond July 3 for the next six months. The state has been under the central rule since June 2018 and the assembly election is expected to be held later this year.

The Governor also apprised the Home Minister about Amarnath Yatra preparation and said that with people's support it will be successful like last year.

The 46-day-long yatra starts on July 1 and concludes on August 15.

Shah, 55, took charge as the 30th Union Home Minister on Saturday succeeding Rajnath Singh, after Prime Minister Narendra Modi's government stormed to power for a second term.

This change comes at a time when India is facing serious security threats ranging from terrorism, secessionism to Maoist insurgency.

With this change of leadership, the Modi government has signalled that its policy on Kashmir will turn more muscular and decisive with an iron-handed approach towards terror, insurgency and secessionism.

Shah is expected to be more proactive in this new role as he leads from the front like he did when he was the Home Minister of Gujarat and handled 11 other portfolios.

After his induction into the Modi Cabinet speculations were rife whether Shah will get finance portfolio or Home. However, putting speculations to rest, PM Modi entrusted Shah with the crucial job given the fact that the new government has highlighted national security as its key agenda in the poll manifesto.
