Sonia re-elected CPP leader, speaks of 'decisive measures', praises Rahul Gandhi's leadership

As Congress MPs re-elected her the leader of parliamentary party (CPP), Sonia Gandhi on Saturday said several "decisive measures" were being mulled to strengthen the organisation and lauded Congress president Rahul Gandhi's "fearless leadership".

Former prime minister Manmohan Singh proposed Sonia Gandhi's name which was unanimously approved by all the MPs at a CPP meeting held here in the shadow of leadership crisis after Rahul Gandhi announced his decision to quit as Congress president.

Meeting the newly-elected MPs for the first time, Rahul Gandhi made it clear that the Congress was ready for a fightback and exhorted them to work like "a pride of brave-hearted lions" to protect the country's Constitution and institutions.

The Congress has been on shaky ground after its second successive defeat in Lok Sabha polls. It has 52 members in the 253-member Lok Sabha.

There will be no walkover for the BJP. The MPs have to be to be a "little more aggressive and they may have to shout a little more" as they will get less time in Parliament like the last time, Rahul Gandhi said, asserting that only the Congress can stand against the BJP.

Gandhi had been staying away from meeting party leaders since he offered his resignation even though the CWC rejected it and passed a resolution authorising him to bring structural changes in the party at all levels.

At the CPP meet, the two leaders stressed that the party will vigorously oppose "divisive and regressive actions" of the government.

Sonia Gandhi urged the MPs to play the role of an effective opposition and ensure better coordination and cooperation with like-minded parties in Rajya Sabha. She told the members that the issues they raise in Parliament must resonate in the minds of party workers and with the public.

Sources said the Congress Parliamentary Party authorised the UPA chairperson to pick the party's leader in Lok Sabha.

"In this time of crisis, we must acknowledge the numerous challenges confronting the Congress party. The CWC met a few days ago to deliberate the next steps and the way forward for us. Several decisive measures to strengthen the party are being discussed," she said, while hinting at changes in the Congress



The sources say the party is discussing several proposals, including installing a non-Gandhi as party chief and a body of senior leaders to act as a guiding force to the new president.

Asked about Rahul's resignation, party chief spokesperson Randeep Surjewala said Rahul Gandhi is the Congress chief and there are no two opinions about it.

"I would request all the naysayers to hold their breath; the Congress Working Committee has authorised Rahul Gandhi to do a complete overhaul of the organisation from top to bottom...I would request all my friends in the media to wait for a while rather than fall prey to speculation," he said.

Sonia said though Congress had 44 MPs in the last Lok Sabha and 55 in Rajya Sabha, under Rahul's leadership the party fought bravely to expose the government's "misdeeds".

"We were in the forefront of ensuring that some of the UPA's historic Acts were not diluted. At the same time, we cooperated with the government on a series of reforms with constructive suggestions.

"This time too, we will support progressive and inclusive policies, but oppose the government strongly whenever they undertake divisive and regressive actions."



While thanking 12.3 crore voters who supported the party, Sonia Gandhi said, "Your vote to the Congress party is a vote for safeguarding our Constitution, a vote for economic and social progress, a vote for liberty, and for social justice."Praising Rahul Gandhi's for his "valiant and relentless campaign", she said as Congress president "he has given his all and toiled night and day".

She said he demonstrated his "fearless leadership" by taking on the Modi government and highlighted the "injustices" carried out against farmers, workers, traders and small businesses, youth, women and the marginalised.

She also said Rahul rejuvenated the organisation in many states, and most recently led the party to victory in Chhattisgarh, Rajasthan and Madhya Pradesh.

"As Congress president, he earned the respect and love of every worker and crores of voters across the length and breadth of our country. Even as I speak, emotional messages are coming from all corners, vindicating his leadership. We all express our gratitude to him for his sincerity of purpose, relentless effort, hard work and leadership," she said.

Addressing the CPP meet, Rahul Gandhi cautioned the lawmakers that it will "be like the British period, when not a single institution supported the Congress party" and asserted "yet we fought and won and we are going to do it again".

"We are 52 members and I guarantee you, it does not matter what institutions are standing against these 52 members. It does not matter who is standing against these 52 members. These 52 members are going to fight the BJP every single inch, without giving this much and that applies to the members from Rajya Sabha as well," he said, adding the Congress will fearlessly do its duty as the leading opposition party in Parliament and outside.

Meanwhile, Rahul congratulated the newly-elected CPP leader. "Under her leadership, the Congress will prove to be a strong and effective opposition party that will fight to defend the Constitution of India," he said.

Sonia and Rahul Gandhi along with Priyanka Gandhi Vadra later met all the MPs at the UPA chairperson's 10 Janpath residence.

(This story has not been edited by Business Standard staff and is auto-generated from a syndicated feed.)
