Sonia hints ‘fearless’ Rahul will remain Cong chief

Sonia Gandhi praises Rahul, says 'Congress president showed fearless leadership'

NEW DELHI: Virtually ruling out a change of leadership in Congress, Sonia Gandhi on Saturday said her son and party president, Rahul Gandhi, had led a “valiant and relentless” election campaign and lauded him for his “fearless leadership” against an opponent she said was capable of manipulating public opinion and had unlimited resources.In her speech to the Congress parliamentary party (CPP) after being re-elected chairperson, Sonia defended Rahul — who has offered his resignation as Congress chief — saying he had given his all and toiled day and night. “He demonstrated his fearless leadership by taking the Modi government head on,” she said.At the same event, Rahul also struck a combative tone, saying the 52 Congress MPs in the new Lok Sabha will “fight BJP every inch, without giving this much and that applies to members of the Rajya Sabha as well”. He reiterated that Congress would fight hatred, cowardice and anger with “love and compassion”.The short speeches to the CPP seem to indicate that there will be no vacancy at the top and Rahul will continue to be in charge even if he is yet to formally accede to pleas and suggestions of party leaders and allies not to insist on pressing his offer to resign as Congress president. Allies like Sharad Pawar and M K Stalin have urged Rahul to reconsider his quit offer.The possibility of Rahul taking over as leader of the party in Lok Sabha remains open, and a decision on this is expected in a few days. It is expected that senior leader Ghulam Nabi Azad will continue as leader of opposition in Rajya Sabha.Sonia Gandhi spent several minutes dwelling on Rahul’s poll-time efforts and said emotional messages coming from all corners had vindicated the Congress chief’s leadership. Pointing to the “unprecedented opportunity” in the “unprecedented crisis” facing the party, the former Congress chief also said it was up to the party to grasp the opportunity with humility and self-confidence.“The people of India expect us to honour their mandate by renewing and reinvigorating ourselves. Undeterred by the many challenges that lie ahead, we will rise again,” she said.Referring to 2019 Lok Sabha polls as the “hardest election of our career”, Sonia spoke of the “unprecedented hostility” Congress faced from the ruling party. Asking MPs to not lower their guard, she said, “We must remember that our numbers in Rajya Sabha will be challenged” and urged better coordination and cooperation with like-minded parties.“The issues we raise in Parliament, must resonate in the minds of our party workers and with the public,” she said. Sonia reminded the MPs that Rahul had succeeded in reviving the party in Madhya Pradesh, Chhattisgarh and Rajasthan. She thanked 12.3 crore voters who voted for Congress.Congratulating his mother for her re-election as CPP leader, Rahul Gandhi said the party will prove to be an “effective opposition party to defend the Constitution of India”. “Congratulations to Smt Sonia Gandhi on being elected Leader of the Congress Parliamentary Party. Under her leadership, the Congress will prove to be a strong and effective opposition party, that will fight to defend the Constitution of India,” he tweeted.
