Supreme Court lawyer who filed triple talaq plea attacked

The probe report said that Saqib and his associate, while travelling by the train, had identified Faiz as the woman who debated on TV supporting the triple talaq ban.

The Special Cell of Delhi Police has filed a chargesheet in the case where a Supreme Court lawyer Farah Faiz, who had filed a petition to abolish triple talaq, was attacked by Saqib (a suspected terrorist) and his associate inside the Golden Temple train in 2016.

On June 17, 2016, Faiz registered a case with the Delhi GRP, regarding the attack on her by two persons who she suspected to be students of a madrasa. Police had launched an investigation, but even after two years, no arrest has been made.

In December 2018, the National Investigation Agency (NIA) busted an ISIS Harkat-ul-Harb-e-Islam module. They arrested 10 suspected terrorists from Delhi, Uttar Pradesh.

It was revealed that they had planned a terrorist attack on politicians. Saqib, Imam of Hapur mosque, was among the 10 arrested. When lawyer Faiz saw Saqib's photograph in the newspaper she contacted Nizamuddin GRP where she had registered a case against the accused.

The probe report said that Saqib and his associate while travelling by the train, had identified Faiz as the woman who debated on TV supporting the triple talaq ban. They wanted to teach her a lesson as she was working against women Sharia; so they attacked her, she said. According to the chargesheet, Saqib had told Faiz, "Kuch sirfiri aurate samjhti hain ki hum Sharia badal denge (Some women think that they can change Sharia)."

The attackers tried their best to push her out from the running train but failed when other passengers intervened in the dispute. The passengers saved Faiz and meanwhile, the attackers managed to get down from the train at Ghaziabad railway station.

Later, during interrogation by the Special Cell, Saqib said that the Modi government is trying to attack Islam through the triple talaq ban, as Sharia does not support it.

According to the interrogation report, accessed by India Today TV, Saqib went to Kashmir with his friend in 2015 and was radicalised there.

He later met Sohail, who was the chief of ISIS' Amroha module, according to the NIA. Saqib revealed that he and his associates were gathering weapons and gunpowder for a bomb blast in Delhi and to attack RSS leaders.

They wanted to take revenge but the NIA, with the help of Uttar Pradesh and Delhi Police, nabbed the terror suspects before the planned attack.
