No Hindi in our blood: DMK chief MK Stalin over new education policy row

MK Stalin said that DMK would wage a war against the BJP-led government at the Centre if they impose Hindi in Tamil Nadu. (Photo: Getty Images)

Reacting to the HRD ministry's new education policy draft which introduces Hindi as a compulsory subject in the non-Hindi speaking states, Dravida Munnetra Kazhagam (DMK) president MK Stalin on Saturday said that Hindi is not in the blood of the people of Tamil Nadu.

MK Stalin's statement came hours after the draft National Education Policy, presented by K. Kasturirangan Committee to the central government on May 31, suggested a three-language formula for schools in the state. The draft also bats for Hindi from pre-school to class 12 in all the non-Hindi speaking states.

The 500-page report states that non-Hindi speaking states would include the regional language, English and Hindi, while states, where Hindi is spoken, would have English and another modern Indian language in addition to Hindi.

Stating that DMK party MPs would take up the matter in Parliament, MK Stalin said that there is no space for Hindi in the blood of Tamilians. "Imposing Hindi on Tamil Nadu would be similar to throwing stones at a beehive," the DMK president said.

MK Stalin also said that his party would wage a war against the Bharatiya Janata Party-led government at the Centre if they impose Hindi in the southern state. MK Stalin said the three-language formula was a big shocker, and the recommendation would divide the country.

The move was opposed by the political parties in Tamil Nadu, including the DMK.

Speaking to reporters in Chennai, DMK Lok Sabha member Kanimozhi said her party would oppose any such move. "I warn BJP any such move will cause them a huge disaster," DMK leader MK Stalin said. MDMK leader Vaiko warned of a "language war".

"The DMK is ready to face any consequences to stop Hindi being forced on people," Trichy Siva, DMK Rajya Sabha MP, said.

As the Tamil Nadu leaders warned of agitation if Hindi is imposed on the state, the Central government clarified that the draft National Education Policy is just a recommendation and not a policy yet. Former HRD minister Prakash Javadekar said that the government has no intention of imposing Hindi or any other language.

"There is no intention of imposing any language on anybody, we want to promote all Indian languages. It's a draft prepared by the committee, which will be decided by the government after getting public feedback," Prakash Javadekar told news agency ANI.
