Mamata Banerjee changes Facebook, Twitter display picture to 'Jai Hind, Jai Bangla'

Mamata changes FB, Twitter picture to 'Jai Hind, Jai Bangla' | Photo Credit: PTI

Kolkata: West Bengal Chief Minister and Trinamool Congress (TMC) chief Mamata Banerjee changed the display picture on Twitter and Facebook to 'Jay Hind, Jay Bangla’ on Sunday night.

Several TMC leader also followed the suit and changed their display picture on social media to 'Jay Hind, Jay Bangla’. The picture of Trinamool's official Twitter and Facebook accounts were also changed to 'Jay Hind, Jay Bangla'

Earlier in the day, the TMC chief had slammed the BJP in a Facebook post, accusing it of using religious slogan Jai Sri Ram as their party slogan.

"Jai Sia Ram, Jai Ram ji ki, Ram Naam Satya hai etc. have religious and social connotations. We respect these sentiments. But BJP is using religious slogan Jai Sri Ram as their party slogan in a misconceived manner by way of mixing religion with politics," she said in her post.

The West Bengal CM also urged people to refrain from any sort of chaos and unrest.

"We do not respect this forcible enforcement of political slogans on others in the name of so-called RSS which Bengal never accepted. This is a deliberate attempt to sell hatred ideology through vandalism and violence which we must oppose together," she added.

The West Bengal CM said one cannot "fool" the people all the time while warning everyone against “divisiveness being spread in Bengal”.

"This is high time that proper action is taken to restrain political workers not to indulge in activities of creating unrest, chaos, violence and disruption of normal life by taking recourse to misplaced ideologies in the so-called name of religion to create a divide among the people. If all other political parties start resorting to these sort of divisive and disruptive activities, then the entire environment would become highly vitiated and counterproductive," she said.

Asserting that she has no issues with any party slogan, she wrote: "I have no problem, regarding any particular slogan of political parties in their rallies, and for their party purpose. Every political party has their own slogan. My party has Jai Hind, Vande Mataram. The Left has Inquilab Zindabad. Others have different slogans. We respect each other."

She urged people to oppose such moves of BJP very strongly in order to keep the secular character of the country as enshrined in the Constitution.

"I appeal to all the people of the country and the state to give a befitting reply to hatred politics and show respect to our country's glorious culture and heritage. Let us all be proud of our culture and heritage. Jai Hind, Jai Bangla, Joyo He," she added.

The Trinamool chief accused BJP of trying to spread ideology of hatred through a section of the media to deviate everyone for reality and truth.

"The so-called BJP media and so-called fake video, fake news, misinformation and disinformation to create confusion and to suppress truth and reality," she wrote.
