Hindi imposition row: Siddaramaiah calls it an assault, MNS says don't incite us

Siddaramaiah and Raj Thackeray's MNS have spoken out against the draft education policy.

As the row over a draft education policy promising to impose Hindi as a third language in all non-Hindi speaking states continues to rage, former Karnataka CM Siddaramaiah has become the latest to slam the move. Raj Thackeray's Maharashtra Navnirman Sena (MNS) has also joined the chorus and warned the Centre.

Siddaramaiah posted a series of tweets on Monday to slam the Centre with the hashtag #StopHindiImposition.

Siddaramaiah wrote, "New National Education Policy draft imposes Hindi in non Hindi states & this goes against our sentiments. If recognition of regional identity is inconsistent according to few then imposition of Hindi is nothing but a brutal assault on our States."

Instead of imposing Hindi, the government should focus on recognising regional identities & give more space to the states to express & manifest their ideas through their own culture & language.



We are all Kannadigas in India.#StopHindiImposition

3/3 Siddaramaiah (@siddaramaiah) June 3, 2019

He added, "Instead of imposing Hindi, the government should focus on recognising regional identities & give more space to the states to express & manifest their ideas through their own culture & language. We are all Kannadigas in India."

Meanwhile in Tamil Nadu, which was the first state to launch a protest against the draft National Education Policy, DMK is likely to pass a resolution against the move.

MNS led by Raj Thackeray has warned the Centre to not incite them.

In a tweet, MNS has said, "Hindi is not our mother tongue, do not enforce it on us and incite us."

Earlier, Karnataka Chief Minister H D Kumaraswamy, too, joined the outrage and said that one language should not be imposed on others in the name of three-language formula.

"I am aware of the draft education policy released by the HRD Ministry yesterday. One language should not be imposed on others for any reason in the name of three-language policy. State governments stand will be known to the Centre after gathering more information on this issue," he tweeted.

Meanwhile, Union Minister Prakash Javadekar on Saturday clarified that the committee had only prepared a draft report and no decision has been taken on implementing it.

Javadekar asserted that no language should be imposed on anyone.

The draft of the new National Education Policy, proposed by the panel constituted by Javadekar when he was HRD minister in the previous Modi government, had suggested teaching of Hindi in non-Hindi speaking states.

Ramesh Pokhriyal has taken over as the new HRD minister after Javadekar was moved to the Information and Broadcasting Ministry.
