Amit Shah stresses on zero-terror policy in his first meeting with top MHA officials

Union Home Minister Amit Shah | Photo Credit: PTI

Union Home Minister Amit Shah on Monday, June 3, held a crucial meeting with top officials of the various security agencies who apprised him of the security situation in Jammu and Kashmir, Kerala and Maoist-hit regions of the country and also gave him a brief over cross-border threats. According to reports, the former Bharatiya Janata Party (BJP) president asserted that the government will continue its zero-terror policy in Jammu and Kashmir and also expressed concerns over Maoist violence and jihadi group activities, particularly in Kerala and adjoining states.

Amit Shah met with National Security Advisor Ajit Doval, who was handed an extended five-year term on Monday. Secretary of Home Rajiv Gauba, Director of the Intelligence Bureau Rajiv Jain, RAW chief Anil Dhasmana along with several other senior officials of the home ministry attended the meeting as well.

During the meet, the Home Minister directed his officials to remain unfazed by the criticism that might come their way and continue with the zero-tolerance policy across the country, suggested reports. Special notes were presented on the situation in Jammu and Kashmir by the Jammu and Kashmir Affairs division which deals with counter-terrorism, the Armed Forces (Special Powers) Act and coordination between ministries, including external affairs and defence.

Over 100 terrorists have been eliminated by the security forces in Jammu and Kashmir in 2019 alone in the wake of 37 attacks in which 12 persons were killed and more than 40 were injured. Earlier in its 2019 election manifesto, the BJP has promised to scrap Article 370 and Article 35A from Jammu and Kashmir, and the party is yet to talk on this matter.

Apart from the threat that the country faces within its boundaries, the officials also briefed the home minister about the cross-border threat from neighbouring countries like Pakistan and Bangladesh.

Amit Shah is expected to meet the heads of paramilitary forces and police organisations in the coming days. As per reports, he will also take a look at the Delhi Police as a reshuffle at the top in the police department is heavily mooted.
