#MenToo: Named as plotter, woman could be held

MUMBAI: With the lawyer of the woman who accused actor Karan Oberoi of rape alleging that she had “directed” the May 25 attack on herself, city-based advocate Hitesh Jain , who is independent to the matter under probe, said she ought to be arrested “forthwith” by the police.Jain also said that in a peculiar case such as this one, “on fresh twists the police should not oppose the bail plea made by the accused.” It is after all the question of liberty of a man, he added. The prosecution had on Monday opposed the bail plea of the woman’s lawyer, Ali Kaashif Khan If police have not arrested the woman yet — since the law mandates a woman cannot be arrested between sunset and sunrise (the hearing in her lawyer’s case ended in the evening on Monday) — they could issue her a notice and also keep a watch on her movements till they call her for questioning.The other question is if the woman can seek anticipatory bail. If she fears she may be arrested in the case, she can, said a lawyer. She had not one but two lawyers who argued on her behalf to oppose the actor’s bail plea in the rape case. The court in Dindoshi, Goregaon , had allowed her to intervene as an informant and add to the public prosecutor’s submissions in opposing his bail plea.Karan Oberoi’s lawyer Dinesh Tiwari said on Monday that since Khan had blamed the woman for planning the attack on herself, police ought to arrest her as a corollary. “It is a rare case where a lawyer has been accused of indulging in criminal activity and has surrendered,” Tiwari said. “It is elementary knowledge that a lawyer would be acting on instructions of his client, but these cannot go beyond legal activities. The limited question is, who asked him to do it? If he (lawyer) is now saying it was his client, the first informant, she should be made an accused,” he stressed.Sheetal Pandya, one of the woman’s two lawyers in Dindoshi court (the other being Khan), said on Monday, “Since the past few days I have not been in touch with her. She has not approached me either for appearing as her lawyer in his (Oberoi’s) bail plea hearing in Bombay high court.”Pandya added, “But soon after the sessions court’s bail rejection order, we had discussed that she needs to engage a senior counsel for any appeal that Oberoi may file in HC for bail.”Pandya had made most of the submissions on the woman’s behalf as intervener in Karan’s first bail plea hearing. But Khan had closed the submissions with a flourish after reading out text messages sent and received from two of the informant’s phones which he was carrying and which he displayed in court on May 17. The court then refused bail to Oberoi.
