Top E-Commerce Android Mobile Apps by Number of Installs: Part 2

The previous post discusses top 5 e-commerce android mobile apps. They offer unique advantages and distinguishing features, which make them excel among so many online marketplaces in the world. As cited by as cited by Nina Angelovska on Forbes, Androidrank.org ranks them based upon the number of active users and installs. In the following list, there are two Amazone mobile apps, one based on India and another one is the global online store.

More on the List of Top E-Commerce Android Mobile Apps

Amazon India

Despite young age, Amazon India rises to popularity in a fast way. It was launched in 2012. At that time, Amazon had two comparison sites in the same country, namely Amazon India and Junglee, which it acquired in 1998. Then, Amazon decided to close down Junglee,com in 2017. Amazon India has more than 206M installs.

Amazon Shopping

The USA-based Amazon online store is a multinational technology company, which was founded in 1994. Amazon.com Inc focuses not only on e-commerce but also on cloud computing, artificial intelligence, and digital streaming. As a result, Amazon is listed in the world’s top four technology companies. The other three companies are Google, Facebook, and Apple. Now, it has more than 163 M installs across the world.

Besides its large consumer base, Amazon offers competitive advantage in the terms of price, delivery services, and diverse partnership schemes. Sellers from different countries can sell their products to consumers in different countries or even different continents.

Mercado Libre

The Argentina-based e-commerce marketplace has more than 146 installs. It operates in Latin America and it is commonly referred to as the Amazon of Latin America. Actually, it has some similarities with Amazon when it comes to the business models. It focuses on growth despite lower profitability. Mercado Libre is a actually a longtime good performer in Latin America. It has not only a massive consumer base but also payment options. Accordingly, its potential to grow is promising.

JOOM

This is one of the youngest e-commerce marketplaces, which rise rapidly into one of the top E-Commerce Android Mobile Apps. Yes, JOOM was just launched in 2016 in Riga, Latvia. At the age of 3 years, JOOM now has more than 100M installs. Its main advantages include low price deals, interesting offers, and gifts.

The marketplace is said to target Amazon consumers in France. This becomes evident when it began to recruit French merchants this year. The management is convinced that if JOOM is successful in France, they will be successful in the rest of European countries.

Club Factory

The online marketplace is also relatively young, namely 5 years old. The China-based online store now has more than 100M installs. It becomes popular in a short period after being successful to position itself in potential markets like Europe, the United States, India, Southeast Asia, and the Middle East.

Overall, top 10 E-Commerce Android Mobile Apps have been discussed in this article and the previous one. Studies show that mobile app shopping contributed only 46% to the total online shopping, while the rest is still dominated by desktop-based process. However, with the coming of mobile-based payment method, the consumers will eventually shift to the new method.
