Deadline set for completion of underpass, flyover under SRDP

Property acquisition still remains a sticking point

The Greater Hyderabad Municipal Corporation (GHMC) Commissioner, M. Dana Kishore, has set December as deadline for completion of a vehicular underpass and a flyover under construction between L.B. Nagar and Sagar Ring Road, as part of the Strategic Road Development Plan (SRDP).

During an inspection on Tuesday, Mr. Dana Kishore asked the engineers to expedite the work so that both the structures are opened for public before December.

Of the two, the L.B. Nagar underpass, being built from the Nagole side of the junction towards Bairamalguda, would bypass the junction to avoid vehicular traffic to and from Dilsukhnagar. The construction of the underpass would address 90% of the traffic problems at the junction by allowing smooth flow of vehicles from both sides, Mr. Dana Kishore said.

So far, work pertaining to 17 rafts, 76 retaining lifts, 111 pre-cast box wall segments, and 49 box pre-cast slab planks has been completed for the 520-meter underpass, the GHMC informed through a statement.

Property acquisition, however, remains a sticking point. More than 30 properties are to be acquired towards Bairamalguda for completion of the project, of which, consents have been gained for about 15, the officials informed. Assistance would be sought for the acquisition of the remaining properties from local legislator Sudheer Reddy, who was present with Mr. Dana Kishore during the inspection.

According to the design, the L.B. Nagar underpass would connect to a flyover that is planned to be built between Bairamalguda and Sagar Ring Road. Mr. Dana Kishore asked the engineers to ensure its completion by December. The flyover planned on the other side of the road could not be taken up owing to land acquisition problems, the officials informed him.

The Commissioner also inspected the progress of the right-hand side flyover from Dilsukhnagar side of the junction. Six pillars have been erected for the flyover, while foundation has been dug for six more. Twenty one pre-cast pier segments have been completed too.

The left-hand side flyover was completed and opened for vehicles a couple of months ago.

Near Kamineni Junction, while the left-hand side flyover was launched in August last year, the same on the right-hand side necessitates shifting of a water pipeline with 1,600 mm diameter, the officials informed the Commissioner. Same is the problem encountered at Nagole junction for construction of a flyover.

As part of Package-II of SRDP, work on flyovers and underpasses are in progress at five locations — L.B. Nagar Junction, Kamineni Junction, Chintalkunta Junction, Bairamalguda Junction, and Nagole Junction. Of the planned structures, two flyovers and one underpass have been completed so far.

Mr. Dana Kishore asked officials to expedite the land acquisition process for the remaining structures at L.B. Nagar and Nagole Junctions.

Later, he inspected the beautification and development work pertaining to Bairamalguda lake, and issued necessary instructions.
