Karnataka: Don’t sideline seniors, says Congress leader R Ramalinga Reddy

BENGALURU: The JD(S)-Congress government, already under threat from the BJP, is facing trouble, this time from within. Former home minister R Ramalinga Reddy (Congress) slammed the party for toying with the idea of inducting independent legislators into the Kumaraswamy cabinet. He said senior party leaders are being overlooked.Reddy used Twitter to take a dig at the top brass, saying non-induction of veterans into the coalition ministry and poor performance of some ministers had led to its poor showing in the recent Lok Sabha polls in Karnataka.Reddy, upset at not being included in the cabinet, suggested that ministers who didn’t deliver in the polls should be given organisational positions. “There was no coordination between senior party leaders in the state and the high command and this was the major reason for the humiliating loss in the LS polls,’’ he added.His outburst follows reports that Congress and JD(S) are likely to fill three vacant cabinet posts by taking in MLAs R Shankar and H Nagesh, among others, to stop BJP from increasing its strength in the assembly and avert a crisis to the year-old coalition government.He said though he’s a seven-time MLA, the party doesn’t think deserves to be a minister. It’s also true with other seniors like HK Patil and R Roshan Baig. “Any party or government should have the right mix of seniors and juniors to perform,’’ he added.Baig, who had called Karnataka Congress in-charge KC Venugopal a buffoon, supported Reddy. “Seniors are being sidelined, we should hold discussions. We can't be mute spectators. There’s no chemistry between the coalition parties.’’Reddy’s enraged placard-wielding supporters protested at the Congress office in Bengaluru on Tuesday.Meanwhile, Tumakuru district Congress leaders blamed its party workers for the defeat of the coalition candidate in the constituency. District Congress president R Ramakrishna wrote to Venugopal that former MP SP Muddahanumegowda and former MLA K N Rajanna worked against the party and that led to the defeat of coalition candidate HD Deve Gowda. Last week, Rajanna had blamed deputy chief minister and Tumakuru district in-charge minister G Parameshwara for Gowda’s defeat.
