Huawei seeks quick reply from India on 5G trial participation

NEW DELHI: Huawei Technologies has called on India to take a quick decision on whether it will be allowed to participate in development of 5G technology, saying it had answered all the questions that have been asked of it.“Policy, standard procedure will provide security benefits for the industry and India. It is time for the telecom department to make a decision now,” Huawei India chief executive Jay Chen told ET.He said the Chinese gear maker has been actively engaging with the Department of Telecommunications (DoT) for the past seveneight months, and had answered all questions that they had asked.DoT, however, appears to be divided on the issue, which is not just a matter of technology and security but also of geopolitical importance, given the sensitive nature of Sino-Indian diplomatic ties.A section of the DoT believes the country can’t depend on just two network equipment suppliers — Nokia and Ericsson — and point out that there are risks from European vendors as well. This section believes Huawei should be given an opportunity in the 5G trials, which will also allow India to scrutinise security vulnerabilities, if any. The other section, though, believes Chinese vendors are a serious security threat to India, given those companies are — under Chinese law — duty-bound to share information with the government.The Chinese equipment company, which has been under scrutiny worldwide with the US putting it in on the blacklist, has been arguing that its 5G network technology was safe, and wants the Indian government to take an independent decision soon. Indian telcos Vodafone Idea andhave also sought urgent clarity from the DoT on whether they should partner with Huawei for 5G-led field trials, with billions of dollars at stake. On Monday, telecom minister Ravi Shankar Prasad had said the Huawei issue needs to be looked at not just through the prism of technology, but from the security angle as well.The debate around Huawei is hotting up in the country as India gets ready to auction 5G spectrum later this year, and hold 5G trials to develop use cases in 100 days, as per a timeline announced by Prasad.With the Centre sticking to its auction schedule, Huawei India’s top executive said the industry should not waste any more time. “The auction can happen as per schedule of the new government. I believe we don’t have a choice or time to waste on this,” Chen said.He said that many other use cases of 5G-based telecom services can be developed for all different verticals and industries. He said Huawei would support ‘dynamic spectrum sharing’ in 5G technology-based commercial services, providing higher network quality, and believes that the next-generation of services are coming to India faster than expected. “So once 5G comes, the biggest use case will be the network quality and experience itself in India,” Chen said.
