'Humse jo takrayega, woh choor-choor ho jayega': Mamata Banerjee sends out sharp message to BJP on Eid

West Bengal CM Mamata Banerjee | Photo Credit: PTI

Kolkata: West Bengal Chief Minister and Trinamool Congress (TMC) chief Mamata Banerjee on Wednesday took a jibe at the Centre on the occasion of the festival of Eid and said 'Humse jo takrayega, woh choor-choor ho jayega' .

In a message to the Muslim community, she said that there is nothing to worry about. In an apparent attack at the BJP, she added that whoever tries to mess with her, will be destroyed.

“You people observed fast for 10 days... You need not worry or get upset about anything. There is no reason to be scared of... You do good and progress, work for humanity,” the West Bengal CM told the Muslim community assembled for an Eid congregation.

Banerjee apparently used the occasion to reassure that the minority vote share remains preserved with the Trinamool that faced a crushing defeat in the recently held Lok Sabha elections.

Last week, the TMC chief had slammed the BJP in a Facebook post, accusing it of using religious slogan Jai Sri Ram as their party slogan.

"Jai Sia Ram, Jai Ram ji ki, Ram Naam Satya hai etc. have religious and social connotations. We respect these sentiments. But BJP is using religious slogan Jai Sri Ram as their party slogan in a misconceived manner by way of mixing religion with politics," she said in her post.

Urging people to refrain from any sort of chaos and unrest, the West Bengal CM also said, "We do not respect this forcible enforcement of political slogans on others in the name of so-called RSS which Bengal never accepted. This is a deliberate attempt to sell hatred ideology through vandalism and violence which we must oppose together."

The West Bengal CM said one cannot "fool" the people all the time while warning everyone against “divisiveness being spread in Bengal”.

"It is high time that proper action is taken to restrain political workers not to indulge in activities of creating unrest, chaos, violence and disruption of normal life by taking recourse to misplaced ideologies in the so-called name of religion to create a divide among the people. If all other political parties start resorting to these sort of divisive and disruptive activities, then the entire environment would become highly vitiated and counterproductive," she said.

She also urged people to oppose such moves of BJP very strongly in order to keep the secular character of the country as enshrined in the Constitution.

"I appeal to all the people of the country and the state to give a befitting reply to hatred politics and show respect to our country's glorious culture and heritage. Let us all be proud of our culture and heritage. Jai Hind, Jai Bangla, Joyo He," she added.

The Trinamool chief accused BJP of trying to spread the ideology of hatred through a section of the media to deviate everyone's attention from grim reality and truth.

"The so-called BJP media and so-called fake video, fake news, misinformation and disinformation to create confusion and to suppress truth and reality," she wrote.
