World Environment Day 2019: Over 300 young environmentalists to clean up Powai lake in Mumbai

Weather News and Analysis

Skymet Weather Team

More than 300 young environmentalists, including both students and local residents, are expected to join Young Environmentalists Programme NGO at the huge community clean-up drive on the occasion of World Environment Day on June 5.

According to the founder of Young Environmentalists Programme, Powai lake in Mumbai is home to numerous wetland birds and crocodiles which need to be protected from continuous infrastructure development works carried out in close proximity of the waterbody. Also, there is a lot of man-made trash besides water hyacinths seen at the lake, which needs to be removed.

Volunteers will work along the lake promenade and in the neighborhood carrying out greening and cleaning projects. They will get rid of weeds and litter, plant more than two dozen trees and also install waste-art. The community work will begin at around 8 am today which is celebrated all over the world as World Environment Day. This year's theme by the United Nations Environment Department is #BeatAirPollution.

Every year, tons of garbage gets dumped into the Powai Lake. This year there are also lots of concrete wreckages. The garbage includes plastic bottles, plastic bags and packaging, food, gutkha wrappers, and cigarette butts – sarcastic from the natural beauty of the shore and harming the lakes flora, fauna, and wildlife.

The team also has qualified green teachers and environment professionals leading the interactive photography biodiversity trail. The Youth Ambassador of Bombay Scottish-Mahim school will be leading a thrilling pack of youngsters to drive home the message of environment action to fight climate change.

The Environment Impact Assessment report for the Metro line 6 has also been requested for from the MMRDA to ensure that the lake doesn't get affected by any hydraulic aquifer disruptions, lifelong vibrations from the metro and soil erosion caused by the next few years construction leave alone the noise and air pollution which the local residents will face in the coming years.

Image Credit: Wikipedia
