India seeks info after US issues Boeing warning

US issues warning on Boeing, India seeks info

NEW DELHI: Worrying news from aircraft major Boeing don't seem to be ending. The US Federal Aviation Authority (FAA) recently issued a warning about certain versions of the popular Boeing 787 Dreamliner 's brakes and steering functions. The American regulator wants "unsafe conditions" on these planes to be addressed in this directive that is effective from Thursday. On its part, Boeing says these issues have already been resolved.Among Indian carriers, Air India has 27 B787-8 and Vistara will start getting six of the ordered B787-9 from next January. Over 70 big international airlines like Singapore Airlines Qatar Airways and British Airways use this aircraft and many of them operate it on India routes. Boeing has so far assembled and delivered 829 B787 versions to customers and has a backlog of 584 orders for this aircraft."We are adopting a new airworthiness directive (AD) for certain Boeing 787-8 and 787-9 airplanes. This was prompted by a determination that certain areas in the tire/wheel threat zones could be susceptible to damage, which could result in loss of braking on one main landing gear (MLG) truck, loss of nose wheel steering, and loss of directional control on the ground when below rudder effectiveness speed," the FAA said in an AD issued on May 2, 2019.The US regulator "estimate(s) that this AD affects 87 airplanes of US registry" (which means flying with American airlines). However, the Directorate General of Civil Aviation and Air India have swung into action. A senior DGCA official said information is being sought from FAA. A senior AI official said: "It is being ascertained if this AD is applicable to the Dreamliners in our fleet." Another official said AI expects to get this "information by Thursday morning.""This AD requires installing hydraulic tubing, a pressure-operated check valve, and new flight control software. We are issuing this AD to address the unsafe condition on these products. This AD is effective June 6, 2019," the FAA directive adds.A Boeing spokesperson said: "This issue has been long since resolved with system improvements that have been incorporated into production for all 787 models. Boeing works closely with FAA to monitor the fleet for potential safety issues and take appropriate actions. This is an ongoing and continuous process.""Boeing issued three service bulletins in 2017 and early 2018 to install new fixes for an identified issue with certain areas in tire/wheel threat zones that may be susceptible to damage. The FAA published an airworthiness directive (AD) mandating that 787 operators install hydraulic tubing, a pressure-operated check valve, and new flight control software. The mandate aligns with Boeing's previous recommendation in two separate service bulletins to operators. Boeing's recommendations are not binding on operators. Only a regulatory agency has the authority to require them. That is what the FAA's rule does," the Boeing spokesperson added.Fresh doubts of B787 safety are coming at a time when over 300 Boeing 737 Max are grounded globally since mid-March following two crashes within 5 months that claimed 346 lives.The Dreamliners were similarly grounded from January 2013 for almost three months, though to be sure that happened as B787s were at that time plagued by electrical system malfunction that were frequently leading to battery overheating or smoke in cabin. These issues were resolved and since April 2013 the Dreamliners are flying.
