5 reasons why Bharat will strike gold at the box-office

1. Bharat- Eid release

2. Bharat- Fan favourite pairing





Soon after that, the internet was flooded with rumors of possible replacements of Priyanka in the film. However, it was finally confirmed that Katrina will be stepping into Priyanka’s shoes and fans couldn’t have been happier with that choice. In fact, Salman has given some of the biggest hits of his career when paired with Katrina so it wouldn’t be wrong to call her his lucky charm as well for the big screen. Bharat will mark the sixth collaboration of the two superstars.

3. Bharat-The hit machine

Despite having a new director on board for a franchise, the film managed to work wonders at the box-office, almost doubling the collections the first instalment of the film managed. Now, the duo are back with Bharat, probably their biggest project due to the sheer scale. If the track record is anything to judge by, we expect this to set riot at the ticket windows as well.

4. Bharat- Stellar supporting cast



While the leading stars of the film are definitely the biggest attraction for the audience, the supporting cast is what makes the film complete. Simply put, two actors cannot carry the film on their shoulders if the people around them are not upto the mark. The film relies equally on the supporting cast as much as the leads and this is a major reason why Bharat works as a film. Other than Salman and Katrina, the film also stars Disha Patani, Sunil Grover, Jackie Shroff and Tabu. Disha Patani plays Salman’s love interest during his younger days. Tabu, who impressed recently with performances in Andhadhun and De De Pyaar De , is seen as Salman’s long lost sister. Jackie Shroff plays the character of Salman’s father. The camaraderie that the two share with each other is definitely a plus to watch.

However, a special mention must be given to Sunil Grover for his portrayal of Vilayati, Bharat’s best friend and confidante. The bond that best friends share is pure and selfless which is reflected beautifully in this film. We definitely would like to see more of him in the future.

5. Bharat- Thumping Music

And the time has finally arrived! Salman Khan is back to treat his fans with a special eidi and this time it is probably the most ambitious project of his career Bharat.is a remake of the Korean film Ode To My Father and in the film, we follow a man’s journey from his childhood up until his twilight years as he navigates through the ups and downs in his life. Bharat is a film that has been making headlines ever since the project was announced. Firstly, people were excited to see a younger version of Salman Khan as it was revealed the journey of his character will begin from a very young age. Later, Priyanka’s unexpected exit from the project came as a shock to many as well but fans seemed pretty okay later as it resulted in Katrina coming on board. So, as people are flocking to theatres to watch their Bhaijaan beat up some baddies, we list 5 reasons Bharat will strike gold at theOver the years, Bollywood stars have sort of sealed certain holidays as their own. While we do see stars overlap quite a few times, more or less their releases come across a specific festival. For Shah Rukh Khan it has been Diwali, for Aamir it has been Christmas and for Salman it’s Eid. In the past, Salman has tasted success during this festival with films like Wanted and Dabangg, so it’ll be hard to argue against the fact that this occasion is his lucky charm.This year on Eid, Salman treated his fans with his latest release Bharat. Salman Khan plays the titular character who gets separated from his father and sister during the Indo-Pak partition in 1947 as a child, Bharat decides to dedicate his entire life to keeping the promise he’d made to his missing father. He takes it upon himself as the eldest son of the house to look after his mother and siblings, hoping their family would reunite some day. Just like his previous Eid releases , Bharat promises you to have an entertaining experience, something that we’ve come to expect from Salman Khan movies off late. Check out the trailer below.To be honest, Priyanka’s sudden exit from the film came across a shocker to many. People were excited to watch Salman and Priyanka’s reunion on the big screen and this project was also supposed to be Priyanka’s big comeback to Bollywood after a short hiatus in the west. However, since the date of the film were clashing with her wedding celebrations, Priyanka decided to take a step back from the project.Talking about successful combinations, Salman Khan and Ali Abbas Zaffar definitely seems to be one as well. The director’s first two films, Mere Brother Ki Dulhan and Gunday did not work as well as expected. However, things took a turn for good after his first collaboration with Salman Khan in Sultan.The film went on to be a mega hit and Ali Abbas Zaffar made everyone aware of his potential. He later worked with Salman Khan once again in Tiger Zinda Hai, a sequel to the 2012 release Tiger Zinda Hai.

A regular occurrence with Salman Khan films is that the music always ends up being a big hit with the public and Bharat was no exception. The talented duo Vishal-Shekhar are the music composers of the film.


