Cheers, sweat, rout... Pawar brings NCP to 20th milestone year

Nationalist Congress Party

Marathwada

Sonia Gandhi

Lok Sabha

Savitribai Phule Pune University

Shivaji University

The(NCP) will complete 20 years on June 10. A perennial underachiever, the party is now facing existential crisis. Due to its Maratha party tag, it has never managed to inspire any confidence among the Dalits and the minorities and has therefore not expanded beyond western Maharashtra and. Yet analysts say the party’s 20th foundation day is an achievement in itself, as no one has survived this long after splitting from the Congress.The NCP was born in 1999 out of defiance by its chief Sharad Pawar, when he was thrown out of Congress party for raising the issue of’s foreign origin. Pawar, along with formerspeaker PA Sangma and former union minister Tariq Anwar, formed the party and termed it ‘national’ even though it was always a regional party restricted to only some parts of western Maharashtra and Marathwada.Within months of breaking away, Pawar had no qualms in again joining hands with Sonia-led Congress in the state. In 1999, while Congress won 75 seats, NCP managed to win only 58 seats. Then on, the party always had to play second fiddle to Congress. In another about-face, he declared support to the BJP state government in 2014, even as vote counting was underway. That year, the BJP and the Sena had fought the assembly elections separately. The constant flip-flops by party leadership, however, raised questions among NCP supporters over what it stood for.The only time NCP managed to win more seats than Congress was in 2004 when it won 71 seats and the Congress 69. This election was fought by the NCP on the issue of James Laine’s allegedly derogatory biography of Chattrapati Shivaji Maharaj and it helped the party consolidate the Maratha vote bank.To Pawar’s credit, he built a secondrung leadership with young blood comprising Ajit Pawar, Dilip Walse Patil, Jayant Patil and Sunil Tatkare. They all bagged ministerial berths and are said to have run their ministries more efficiently than Congress ministers.Over the years, the NCP has reportedly acquired the tag of the most corrupt and arrogant party in the state. The former deputy chief minister Chaggan Bhujbal was arrested by the Enforcement Directorate in what is known as the Maharashtra Sadan Scam. Another deputy chief minister Ajit Pawar had to resign over the Rs 70,000-crore irrigation scam.Political analyst Abhay Deshpande told Mirror, “There are around 100 assembly seats in Vidarbha and Mumbai. Out of total 288 seats, when you have no presence on 100, you can’t dream of being number one party in the state. Now having won more seats than the Congress in the Lok Sabha elections, and with the Congress lacking credible leadership in the state, NCP can dream of playing big brother in this alliance.”Former professor of political science at, Suhas Palshikar said, “There are very few leaders who left Congress and survived. It’s a big achievement for Pawar and the NCP to have survived 20 years.” However, he said, the party’s performance has stagnated and doesn’t go beyond 50-60 seats in the assembly and six or seven in the Lok Sabha. “The party is facing existential crisis now,” he said.Prakash Pawar, professor of political science at Kolhapur’s Chattrapatisaid, “Due to its Maratha party tag, the NCP never managed to inspire any confidence among the Dalits and the minorities and that has resulted in not being able to expand beyond western Maharashtra and Marathwada where Marathas are in large numbers.”Sharing this existential crisis in the state is the Congress party. “Both the Congress and NCP have failed to take into consideration that nearly 50 per cent of Maharashtra has turned urban and the leadership in both the parties is still rural; they have both failed to throw up any credible urban faces,” said Prakash Pawar.
