India, Pak trade fire in Poonch

India, Pak trade fire in Poonch

Rajouri civilian injured in Pak shelling

POONCH/RAJOURI, Jan 17: The Indian and Pakistani armies Thursday traded heavy fire along Line of Control after the latter fired upon five forward posts and civilian population in Gulpur sector in the border district of Poonch.

In the meanwhile, a civilian was injured when Pakistani troops violated ceasefire and resorted to firing and mortar shelling in Laam and Jhangar areas of Nowshera sector along the Line of Control in Rajouri district, officials said.

Defence PRO Lt Col Devender Anand confirmed ceasefire violation by Pakistan. He said, “Pak army initiated unprovoked ceasefire violation by small arms fire and also shelling with heavy caliber weapons in Gulpur, Poonch sector. Indian army also retaliated strongly and effectively.”

Later in the day, the Northern Commander Lt Gen Ranbir Singh visited the border district of Poonch. During his visit, however, the Northern Commander stated that the army was replying befittingly to the Pakistani aggression.

The Indian and Pakistani armies exchanged gunfire along Line of Control in Gulpur sector in Poonch district after ceasefire violation by Pakistani army who fired upon five forward posts, official sources said.

“The firing started when Pakistan’s army violated the ceasefire by firing between 0300 hrs to 0430 hrs,” the sources said. “The Pakistani fire was effectively retaliated,” an official said. No loss of life and property was reported in Poonch sector, he added.

Army sources said that troops of 41 Baloch of Pak army targetted civilian areas and Indian forward posts Nole, Begum, Ramlo, Danda Cheeta and Sasur from their forward posts namely LP, LP Right, Bakri 1st, Bakri main, Bakri 3rd and Bakri. Indian troops of 15 MLI guarding Indian forward posts retaliated and gave a befitting reply to the enemy, sources said that the exchange of fire continued till 04.35 AM.

In the meanwhile, Pakistan troops resorted to firing and mortar shelling on forward posts and civilian areas along the LoC in Nowshera sector in Rajouri district. The ceasefire violation resulted in injuries to a civilian who was hospitalised. The year 2018 had witnessed the highest number — 2936 — of ceasefire violations by Pakistani troops in the last 15 years along the Indo-Pak border

The continuous Pakistani shelling and firing targeting villages has set in fear psychosis among the border dwellers. Pakistan troops resorted to firing and shelling along the LoC in Poonch district of the state for 12 days of this month.

On Monday, Border Security Force (BSF) Assistant Commandant Vinay Prasad was killed in a sniper firing by Pakistani rangers along the International Border (IB) in Hiranagar-Samba sector of Kathua district.

On the same day in another incident, Pakistani troops resorted to firing and shelling along the LoC in Sunderbani sector of Rajouri district. On Sunday, an army jawan was injured in ceasefire violation along the LoC in Keri sector of Rajouri. On Friday, an army porter was killed when Pakistani troops resorted to firing in Nowshera sector of Rajouri district. On the same day, an Army Major and a soldier were killed in an IED blast on the LoC in Laam sub-sector of Rajouri.

On Thursday last, Pakistani troops resorted to firing and shelling in two sectors of Rajouri and Poonch resulting in injuries to an Army Major and a BSF jawan in the Tarkundi forward area of Balakote sector.
