NCDRC: If flat value and claim is over Rs 1 crore, dispute to be taken to NCDRC, Real Estate News, ET RealEstate

MUMBAI: If a flat costs over Rs 1 crore, its buyer will now have to file a consumer dispute straight before the national commission in Delhi, and not before the state commission in the city. Maharashtra state consumer disputes redressal commission recently held that the price of a flat will decide which commission has jurisdiction to hear disputes filed under Consumer Protection Act.The law governing consumer cases has split up jurisdiction based on pecuniary value of the compensation being claimed. Up to Rs 20 lakh can be heard by district fora, Rs 20 lakh to Rs 1 crore by state commissions and beyond that by the national commission based in Delhi.When a flat-buyer approached the state commission for refund of an initial booking amount of Rs 45 lakh, it held that to decide if it had jurisdiction to hear the compliant, it would “have to consider the total consideration (price) of the flat along with compensation claimed’’. As that flat was booked for more than Rs 2 crore, “the consumer complaint is beyond pecuniary jurisdiction of this commission,’’ said D R Shirasao, presiding judicial member of the state commission in a mid-April order. “As total consideration of the flat is over Rs 1 crore, only the national commission has jurisdiction to entertain the consumer’s complaint,’’ said the order.Complainants R K Ramani and Jayanthi Ramani from Mumbai had sought “condonation of delay’’ in filing their complaint against Godrej Landmark Redevelopers Pvt Ltd. Such pleas have to be made when the complaint is filed after the legally stipulated cut-off of two years.“...when the complaint is not within pecuniary jurisdiction of this commission, it is not desirable for the commission to decide the delay condonation application along with complaint,’’ said the order, directing him to file his complaint “before the appropriate commission’’. It would be the national commission, said advocate Manish Gala, who appeared for the builder.Jehangir Gai, a consumer activist and ‘authorised representative’ of the consumer before the commission, said he would challenge the order. “We will go before Supreme Court. The national commission is only in Delhi and the distance would make seeking justice in consumer matters for such consumers a costly affair,’’ Gai said.With many flats in the city costing nothing less than Rs 1 crore, for delays in delivery or any other dispute, for which consumers, who may not go to the real estate regulatory authority, will have to go to the national commission in Delhi. Even if the flat’s price is less than Rs 1 crore, but together with compensation being claimed, the amount exceeds Rs 1 crore, they have to take their dispute to Delhi, said Gai, adding that “it would cause more distress, frustration and hardship’’ to many consumers.
