Designer Tarun Tahiliani shuts down trolls slamming Priyanka Chopra for wearing a sari without a blouse

Tarun Tahiliani defends Priyanka Chopra from trolls | Photo Credit: Facebook

Only recently, Priyanka Chopra turned up the heat this summer by recreating her iconic Desi Girl look from her 2008 movie Dostana on the cover of an international fashion magazine.

The Isn't It Romantic actress took to social media yesterday to share the cover shot in which she can be seen slaying in a backless sequined sari by famous Indian fashion designer Tarun Tahiliani.

Shortly after she uploaded the sultry photo, social media trolls were quick to drop nasty comments on the picture, accusing the actress of misrepresenting Indian culture. Take a look at some of such comments below.

Now, in a recent interaction with Mid-day, Tarun Tahiliani himself jumped to the Baywatch actress' defence and said that he found nothing vulgar about the sari, as is being claimed by more of such online trolls.

“There’s nothing vulgar about it. In fact, not using a choli makes it a global statement. The transition from alluring Indian beauty to this modern goddess for a mainstream fashion cover only speaks of her [Priyanka] versatility. She is truly a modern Indian icon,” he was quoted as saying.

In a candid conversation with InStyle magazine, for the front cover of the July issue of which she draped the sizzling sari, Priyanka said, "My problem is when it comes to Indian fashion, there are always these shiny, sequined, over-the-top Christmas-tree outfits. Those are not the saris I wear. I grew up with my mother wearing saris to the hospital, as a doctor. She’d wear these beautiful ones made of French chiffon, with a bindi over here. And the nape of her neck would smell like Dior's Poison. That, to me, was a modern woman. And that's what I want to show the world."

Ami Patel, the actor's stylist for her India appearances further told the tabloid that the actress and the sari share a special relationship. "Personally, I can't drape a sari, but she can nail it down with just three safety pins. She comes into her own in a sari; whether a jamdani with a three quarter blouse like she wore to the Padma Shri Awards in 2016, or this sexy one on the cover."

On the film front, Priyanka Chopra would next be seen in Shonali Bose's The Sky Is Pink alongside Zaira Wasim, Rohit Suresh Saraf and Farhan Akhtar. The film is slated to hit the theatres on October 11, 2019.
