Cyber attacks on banks a big challenge: Goa DGP

Bhubaneswar: The DGP of Goa, Muktesh Chander, who presented a paper on the cybercrime scenario on the second day of the 61st Senior Police Officers’ Conference here, said that the country’s banks were the prime targets of cyber criminals.

Chander urged banks to focus on securing essential data, like data on customers as well as banks from online frauds.

He presented a paper, ‘Investigation of Cyber Crime’ during the first session of the conference. Later, while speaking to the media he stressed on improving the skill of police forces in view of the fast changing cybercrime scenario in the country.

He told the media that the cybercrime world is difficult to track as it is borderless. “Police forces are equipped to handle cyber crimes, but its dimensions are expanding so fast that we have to keep pace with it,” he said.

He said that officials are dealing with common cyber problems like defacement of websites and Facebook accounts and impersonation on social media platforms. However, the scenario is changing fast here too.

He expressed concern over the mega financial crimes being committed by cyber fraudsters, and described the attack on financial institutions as a major challenge before the country.

Chander pointed out the example of Cosmos Bank in Pune from which international hackers siphoned off Rs 94 crore from various accounts in August 2018.

Warning about the possibility of cyber terrorism, he said, “At one point of time we will have to worry about cyber warfare and attacks on our critical information infrastructure. They have happened abroad and there is no reasons why it will not happen in India.”

He emphasized the fact that the police forces of the country should gear up to meet the challenge by improving their technological skills. He said that around 12,000 cyber crime cases were registered in the country in 2016.

Several other papers were presented during the session including a paper on road safety by the Transport Commissioner, ADGP Sanjiv Panda.
