Hyena sighting near IIT-Indore campus sparks panic, institute asks students to stay alert

Forest rangers found pugs of the animal (Representative Image) | Photo Credit: BCCL

Indore: Authorities at the Indian Institute of Technology (IIM) in Indore, Madhya Pradesh, issued a warning on Friday, asking students to remain alert after locals spotted a hyena near the campus of the premier institution. News of the animal's presence in the area was also shared with the forest department later in the day.

An official with IIT-I confirmed that a hyena was spotted near the campus at Simrol area, about 30 kilometres from Indore city. Adding to the claims, forest ranger Rasheed Khan said that pug marks of the carnivore were found in the area but rangers did not see the animal in flesh and bone. It is believed that the predator may have moved back to the forest area which is located right behind the campus. However, the same is yet to be confirmed.

Similar instances have been reported from the area in the past. In January of this year, a leopard had entered the institute premises triggering panic among students and staff members. The big cat was nabbed with the help of a cage set up by the forest department inside the campus.

Just last month, villagers in Malhargarh tehsil of Mandaur district in the state killed a leopard by beating it to death. Locals claimed that they attacked the predator after it reportedly attacked two villagers. Officials with the forest department confirmed that the sub-adult leopard was killed by the villagers before rangers could reach the spot.

A study conducted earlier this year by scientists from the Wildlife Conservation Society of India (WSCI), the University of Florida and the Maharashtra forest department revealed that leopards, wolves and hyenas show great potential to share lands with humans outside protected areas (PAs). According to a report by Down To Earth, scientists surveyed 89,000 square kilometres of area in Maharashtra to reach this conclusion.
