Aligarh girl's murder: Lawyers refuse to fight case for accused men, cops arrest 2 others

The minor girl was strangled to death with her eyes gouged out. (Photo: Reuters/ Representational image)

A day after police arrested two people accused of brutally murdering a 2.5-year-old girl in Aligarh, the lawyers' association in the city has made it clear that no advocate will appear in court for the accused.

Meanwhile, two more accused were arrested on Saturday, including the wife of prime accused Zahid and his younger brother. Police have so far arrested four people in connection with the brutal murder.

Anoop Kaushik,General Secretary, Aligarh Bar Association: We stand with the family of 2.5-year-old girl who was murdered in Tappal & no advocate will appear in Court for the accused. Advocate from outside will not be allowed to fight the case. We will fight for the child. pic.twitter.com/cwuiaQvwbz ANI UP (@ANINewsUP) June 8, 2019

Speaking to news agency ANI, Anoop Kaushik, General Secretary, Aligarh Bar Association, said, "We stand with the family of a 2.5-year-old girl who was murdered in Tappal and no advocate will appear in court for the accused. An advocate from outside will not be allowed to fight the case. We will fight for the child."

A massive outrage followed after the discovery of the minor's decomposed body on June 2 from Tappal town in Aligarh; many popular figures including actors and politicians condemned the incident and asked for the harshest punishment possible for the perpetrators.

Police rules out rape in murder of 2-year-old girl in Aligarh. Here's a report. #ITVideohttps://t.co/Nounxo6IKQ pic.twitter.com/vvXFrVw0ss India Today (@IndiaToday) June 8, 2019

In one of the most heinous acts witnessed in recent times, the minor girl was strangled to death, her eyes were gouged out and hands were broken. Her body was recovered when a few stray dogs dragged it from a garbage dump. The parents of the minor had filed a missing person's complaint on May 31.

Police officers who spoke to India Today TV said the girl was brutally murdered by two of her neighbours, Zahid and Aslam.

According to Aligarh senior superintendent of police (SSP) Akash Kulhari, Zahid had borrowed some money from the minor girl's father but could not repay the entire sum. When the girl's father asked Zahid to return the entire amount, Zahid threatened him and finally killed his daughter.

"When the girl's father asked for the money, Zahid threatened him with dire consequences. And finally, with the help of his friend Aslam, Zahid killed the girl," Kulhari said.

The post mortem report revealed that there were multiple causes that led to her death. The report showed signs of strangulation and extreme torture.

While the body was found in decomposed condition, the injury marks on her body make it clear that the minor was subjected to torture. Although the family has alleged rape, the SSP said rape has not been proved yet.

A special investigation team comprising six members have been formed to submit a report on the matter within 3 weeks.
