'My sister was raped and strangled but suspect still dodges justice after 10 years'

EXCLUSIVE: Ann Chandradasa said the murder of her sister Michelle Samaraweera 'ripped my family apart'

'My sister was raped and strangled but suspect still dodges justice after 10 years'

In the heartbreaking decade since her murder, Michelle Samaraweera’s family have been unable to find peace as the prime suspect continues to evade the justice system.

Aman Vyas, 34, is at large in India where he went to live with relatives.

The son of a wealthy businessman, he is currently on bail and was last photographed walking in the sunshine to court in New Delhi four years ago.

Michelle’s mother died just days before the recent 10th anniversary of her daughter’s murder.

The victim’s sister, Ann Chandradasa, says: “She never got to see justice for her girl.”

Image: Steve Bainbridge) Steve Bainbridge)

Michelle was found dead aged 35 in a children’s playground in Walthamstow, East London, in 2009.

A postmortem revealed she had been strangled and raped.

Ann adds: “It’s been 10 years and nothing has changed. She was raped and strangled to death but no one seems to care. It’s ripped us apart.”

Michelle had gone out to buy milk near the home she shared with boyfriend Greg Dale, and was last seen on CCTV at a Somerfield store at 1am on May 30, 2009.

Vyas, who had been living in the UK on a student visa, is also wanted over three alleged rapes in the two months before Michelle’s murder.

After Scotland Yard issued an international arrest warrant he was held at New Delhi International Airport in July 2011 while trying to board a flight to Thailand. He was then released on bail.

Walthamstow MP Stella Creasy claims he has since appeared in court at least 50 times, with seven different judges appointed – but there is still no date for a hearing where a ruling will be made on his extradition.

Image: Steve Bainbridge) Steve Bainbridge)

Accountant Ann, 47, from South Ockendon, Essex, says the photo of Vyas enjoying his freedom in 2015 has haunted her ever since.

She adds: “I think about it every day. I carry on for my two children but I find it a struggle to function.

“I can’t even bring myself to go to the cemetery to visit Michelle’s grave. I get to the gates and I think, ‘I can’t do this’. I have never been able to grieve for her. You push back the tears and try to be strong, but she was robbed of a life.

“My mum has been buried with her – but neither will have peace until her killer is caught.”

An application by the fugitive’s lawyers to dismiss the case against him was rejected by an Indian judge in 2012, but the British authorities have been unable to extradite him.

The family are in such despair they have told police not to tell them of any hearings in the case unless his extradition is approved.

Ann, who is one of Michelle’s three sisters, says: “I made the decision not to have any updates six years ago unless he’s on British soil. I had to keep it from my mum at the time, as it would have upset her too much, but it opened up a can of worms every time.”

Image: Steve Bainbridge) Steve Bainbridge)

Ms Creasy has written to the Indian High Commissioner in London, Navtej Sarna, asking him to intervene in the matter. She said: “This is an international scandal.”

In 2016, then-Prime Minister David Cameron ordered ministers to contact their Indian counterparts to try to speed up Vyas’s extradition. And last year Ms Creasy raised the issue with Theresa May in the Commons at Prime Minister’s Questions, asking if she would raise the case with India’s PM Narendra Modi during his visit to the UK in April last year.

But Mrs May said: “There was a number of issues of extradition between the UK and India.

“We do raise a number of cases with the Indian government but it is important we recognise the independence of the judiciary [in India].”

Ms Creasy told the Sunday Mirror: “Despite this being the most serious case of sexual violence involving British citizens, despite raising this repeatedly with ministers and several Prime Ministers, this man is free to go about his daily life whilst the lives of these women and their families has been ruined.

“Ministers tell me they can’t intervene to get this extradition to happen. But they can sit down with the Indian authorities and talk trade.

“It’s time they showed all British lives matters and get Aman Vyas back here so he can face British justice.”

Ann believes not enough was done in the aftermath of Michelle’s murder.

Met officers are believed to have visited India in January 2011, six months before Vyas was captured.

Ann says: “Why did it take so long?” She says Michelle had been suffering from depression, having lost her husband to cancer.

“Michelle wasn’t physically vulnerable but she was mentally,” she says.

“She was so young and never lived a life. It’s not fair.”

The sisters had also lost their father 18 years ago. Ann adds: “On the night before Vyas was arrested I prayed to my dad and said, ‘Come on, give us a sign’. The next morning we got a call saying he had been caught at an airport in New Delhi.”

Ann says her family has suffered enough. “We’ve been through hell and back,” she says.

“It was the week before my daughter’s first birthday when Michelle was murdered. We had lost our dad before that and my mum has now passed away. There’s no family left. I’m begging the Government to end my pain.”

But after 10 years with no closure over her sister’s tragic death, she adds: “I’ve given up hope. Every couple of months you would hear his case had been adjourned or thrown out.

“You were living for that phone call but when it came it just brought misery. It makes me sick. Sometimes I’ve thought of going to India and confronting him myself.

“He’s a coward. I have no faith in our system and theirs. Considering the relations between us and India it’s appalling. It’s like he’s being protected. There’s no one to fight our corner.

“What is it going to take to finally get the peace we deserve?”

Last year, Foreign Office Minister Mark Field said: “I can confirm that the then Prime Minister David Cameron wrote to Prime Minister Modi on 17 June 2016.

“The letter covered a range of issues on which the British Government was engaging the Indian Government at the time, including extradition.

“I can also confirm the then Prime Minister did raise Michelle Samaraweera’s case with Prime Minister Modi.

“I can assure the Hon Lady that the British Government has continued to press the Indian Government to accelerate Mr Vyas’ extradition hearing. Our High Commission officials raised this point with the Indian Government most recently in the margins of the latest hearing on 16 April.”
