Monsoon begins its rhapsody in Kerala

PTI

New Delhi

After a delay of a week, monsoon hit the Kerala coast on Saturday, marking the official commencement of the four-month rainfall season in the country.

“Monsoon has made an onset over Kerala today (June 8),” said India meteorological department’s Director General-designate Mrutyunjay Mohapatra.

Several parts of Kerala have started receiving a good amount of rainfall.

The news will augur well for the country as large parts have been witnessing agriculture distress and water levels in reservoirs in west and south India have dipped to low levels.

On Thursday, the IMD said the arrival of monsoon in Delhi is likely to be delayed by two-three days from its usual onset on June 29. However, Skymet said it may take at least a week longer.

The city is likely to receive normal monsoon. Northwest India too is likely to have normal monsoon.

The IMD declares onset of monsoon over Kerala if after May 10, sixty per cent of the available 14 stations – Minicoy, Amini, Thiruvananthapuram, Punalur, Kollam, Allapuzha, Kottayam, Kochi,





Thrissur, Kozhikode, Thalassery, Kannur, Kudulu and Mangalore – report rainfall of 2.5 millimetres or more for two consecutive days.

This is one of the important parameters to declare the onset of monsoon. The other two factors are speed of the westerlies and long-wave radiation.

OUR REPORTER ADDS FROM PANAJI: Monsoon is expected to reach Goa between June 12 and June 15, the IMD said on Saturday.

However, the IMD has warned that thunderstorms accompanied by lightning and gusty winds reaching up to speed of 40-50 kmph are likely to occur at isolated places in North Goa and South Goa in the next 24 hours.

Heavy rainfall is very likely to occur at isolated places in the state from June 10 to June 12.

In the last 24 hours, 9.2mm of pre-monsoon shower was recorded in Pernem taluka, while no rainfall was recorded in other parts of the state.

The IMD has warned fishermen against venturing into the sea as squally weather with wind speed reaching 30-45 km/ph is likely to prevail over southwest Arabian sea off Somalia coast and southeast Arabian sea off Maldive-Lakshdweep area and Kerala coast.
