A Devout Muslim, a Modi bhakt

When he gifted a shocking defeat to the mighty Mullappally Ramachandran, Kannur’s Congress MP for 15 years since 1984, the then SFI leader AP Abdullakutty became the ‘Athbuthakutty’ (miracle boy) of the CPM. That was in 1999. When the party expelled him in 2009 for praising the ‘Gujarat model’ of Narendra Modi, he landed in the Congress only to relive the experience once again a decade later. Last week, the Congress expelled him – this time too for praising Modi’s development agenda.

The question doing the rounds now is whether Abdullakutty will join the BJP or not. The even more important question is that being a faithful Muslim, isn’t Abdullakutty not compromising the freedom and security of his own community by supporting Modi and his development agenda.

“Many people who ask this have the feeling that I am all set to join the BJP, but my Facebook post that lead to the controversy was wholly about the development successfully implemented by Modi,” he clarifies. To justify his stance that Kerala is at least 15 years behind Gujarat in development, he cites the example of the LNG project at Dahej, commissioned in 2004. “Kerala was also supposed to do it in the same period but we are still working on it, thus losing crores of rupees as revenue and GST,” he says.

Now, the CPM-led government is slowly changing its attitude to save the state from the notoriety of being a place that is not at all investor-friendly, and Pinarayi Vijayan is trying to add momentum to infra projects like national highways and LNG pipeline, which means they are following what he said a decade back, Abdullakutty points out.

The man must be under incredible pressure, not just for being partyless at the moment – which must be like fish out of water – but perhaps even more so from within his community who could possibly be viewing him a traitor twice over. Yet, Abdullakutty is admirably composed, his faith unwavering, his logic convincing. “You are wrong. The campaign that the minorities are under threat if Modi came to power was absolutely wrong,” he interjects. “People said he would redraft the Constitution of India, but you know what he did? He bowed before it at the time of his swearing-in last week, and I am sure it was a symbolic answer by a man who respects our Constitution,” he says. “Yes, all Muslims who have real faith respect their rulers and the nation they belong to, so no educated and faithful Muslim would ever be worried about the Modi government,” he adds.

He is sure that Modi will take the minorities into confidence and also transform India to a superpower in the next five years. “Whichever party rules here, they become part of the system and the BJP could not be an exception,” he says. “It was Manmohan Singh who first talked about the need to abolish subsidies to the privileged, but nobody had the courage to take it up for fear of vote banks. Modi had the nerve, and he successfully implemented it to use the financial benefits for the poor by building them toilets and providing them cooking gas connections, which are not simple things — to understand that you should travel in north India,” Abdullkutty explains.

“You know what Gandhiji said – ‘Recall the face of the poorest and weakest man you have seen and ask yourself if this step you contemplate is going to be any use to him’. That was what Modi did while executing his projects and I support it,” he says. Abdullakutty warms up to the topic. “Gandhiji was a sanatan Hindu and the people of his country, including Modi, can take India forward on this path, so there is nothing wrong in my comparison.”

Abdullakutty is understandably cut up with the Congress, which he believes doesn’t really care for minorities or promote freedom of expression despite making much noise about doing both. “Tell, how many Muslim MPs are there in the Congress from Kerala? The answer to that question is sufficient to prove that the Muslims have no space in the Congress here and I believe the party is influenced by some vested interest though I don’t know if it is Sonia Gandhi or Oommen Chandy,” he fumes.

Though he claims he has never thought of joining BJP, is he ready to be its miracle boy by becoming its minority face? “Don’t make me BJP! My politics is the politics of development, which I see in the Modi regime, as his ideology is based on extreme development and not Hindu extremism,” he explains. He has a charming and impish smile when he utters this. It is for us to guess his next move.

Facebook Twitter Linkedin Email Disclaimer Views expressed above are the author's own.
