JD(U) not to remain part of BJP-led NDA outside Bihar, will fight upcoming Assembly elections alone

JD(U)'s Nitish Kumar (File image)

Patna: The rift between the Janata Dal (United) and Bharatiya Janata Party (BJP) seems to be out in the open as the JD(U) announced on Sunday that it will not be a part of National Democratic Alliance (NDA), led by the BJP, outside the state of Bihar.

The Nitish Kumar-led party declared on Sunday that it would fight the upcoming elections alone in Jammu and Kashmir, Jharkhand, Haryana and Delhi.

JD(U)’s decision to fight the polls alone was made at the party’s National Executive Meet today. The development comes after JD(U) chief rejected the offer of one Cabinet berth for the party at the Centre as “symbolic representation.”

As per sources, Kumar had been miffed by the BJP’s decision to allocate a single Cabinet berth to all the NDA allies – irrespective of the number of seats won by the parties in the 2019 Lok Sabha elections – as “symbolic representation” in the Narendra Modi government.

The BJP had won a landslide majority of 303 seats out of the total 543 seats in the Lok Sabha. While the JD(U) won 16 out of the 17 seats it contested in Bihar Lok Sabha polls, the BJP posted a victory in all 17 seats it contested.

However, on Saturday, the Bihar Chief Minister and JD(U) president clarified that there was no rift between the two parties and that he had declined the Cabinet berth for his party legislators as the party felt that there was no need for "symbolic representation" in the government.

Addressing reporters in Patna on Saturday, Kumar said, "We are fully with the Modi government. I had made it clear after returning from New Delhi (after the swearing-in). Their party (BJP) has a full majority. It has received the mandate to form a government on its own and is not dependent on allies. Yet they expressed the view that there should be a symbolic representation of all alliance partners. We thought it was not needed."

He asserted that there was no "disaffection" between the BJP and the JD(U). He added that the JD(U) had returned to NDA in the interests of Bihar and "to that end our alliance remains firm.”


