10-year-old raped, strangled & dumped in Bhopal nullah

Victim’s body was found in nullah

BHOPAL: A 10-year-old girl was raped and strangled to death in Kamla Nagar area of Bhopal late Saturday night, the shock compounded by allegations that police allegedly initially dismissed the family’s complaint, saying the Class 3 child may have “eloped”. Seven policemen, including an officer, have been suspended for negligence. “We went to police at 9.30pm but they came two hours later. I want justice for my girl,” said her father.Coming just two days after the rape and murder of a fiveyear-old girl in Ujjain , the Bhopal crime has triggered a political battle, with BJP demanding the resignation of chief minister Kamal Nath . The CM said he was pained by the tragedy and promised that no one, “directly or indirectly involved”, will be spared.The child’s body was found in a nullah, with her hands tied and clothes ripped, a stone’s throw from her house at dawn on Sunday. Within hours, police identified a suspect, but he is on the run. Like the Ujjain crime, he too is a neighbour of the victim.With tensions running high, police have cordoned off the locality. Local residents launched protests but police managed to persuade them. Recalling the events of the previous evening, the child’s father said: “I was repairing the cooler around 9pm, when I asked my daughter to get pan masala for me from a nearby shop.She gave me the pan masala and went outside again. I thought she was playing.” Police said the suspect – 32-year-old Vishnu alias Bablu – had seen the girl and lured her home by asking her to fetch pan masala for his mother, too.The child didn’t know his mother was elsewhere and he was alone at home. Just then, the power went out and the area was cloaked in darkness.It wasn’t long before her family realized she was missing. “We started searching for her and approached police at 9.30pm. Police did not respond properly. They came at 11.30pm, searched till 2am and returned. We kept searching the whole night. At 5am, I saw my girl’s body in the nullah behind my home,” he said, all in tears.This time, police acted with alacrity. Cops started going door to door and quickly zeroed in on Bablu, who was missing from the locality. The canal ran behind his shanty, which is two doors away from the victim’s house. According to an officer, bloodstains and other evidence inside the suspect’s house indicate he had raped and killed the girl there. In a macabre twist, he dumped the body right where her family would see her the moment they stepped out.The anguished family and local residents point out that the child was probably in Bablu’s house all the time they were searching for her. The family believes that had police been more proactive, the child may have been saved.Monu Saxena, local Congress Corporator, said, “Police did not act swiftly otherwise the minor would have been saved. The accused was pretending to search for the girl with us and misguided us by saying that she must have gone to Kolar or Bhadbhada,” he said. Seven policemen -- ASI Devi Singh, head constables Nandan and Jagdish and constables Brijendra, Roop Singh, Prahlad and Virendra – were suspended for their delayed response. Bhopal DIG Irshad Wali said action has been taken against seven cops in the incident. “The suspect has been identified and located and will be arrested any time,” he added.Newly-appointed IG (Bhopal range) Yogesh Deshmukh also inspected the crime scene. ASP zone-1 Akhil Patel said the initial autopsy has confirmed rape and strangling.Sources say police have tracked Bablu to Maksi in Ujjain and have held back some family members for questioning. The pan shop owner from whom the child bought pan masala told police that she had come twice, and bought a different brand the second time. It’s the brand Bablu is known to chew, said police.Home minister Bala Bachchan said 20 teams have been set up to arrest Bablu. He hails from Khandwa and is married but his wife left him some time ago. His mother was not in city on the night of the crime but came to Bhopal on Sunday morning to give a photo of the suspect and share information. Police have detained one other family whom the girl’s father suspects, say sources. “Nobody, directly or indirectly involved in the incident, will be spared. This is a very sad and painful crime where an innocent minor has been made a victim. We cannot bring the victim back but we will ensure justice to the bereaved family,” said CM Nath.Bhopal MP Pragya Thakur consoled the family at their home, and demanded death sentence to the rapistkiller. It was the state government’s failure, she said. Senior Congress leader Digvijaya Singh and ministers PC Sharma and Arif Aqueel attended the last rites and promised the harshest possible action against the culprit.A local resident, Saddam, confirmed to TOI that there was no power in the locality when the incident took place. Unscheduled power cuts have become a political issue in MP as ruling Congress accuses BJP, and BJP calls it a failure of the government.
