Congress-JD(S) Coalition has received 'Commission' in Jindal case

Congress-JD(S) Coalition has received “Commission” in Jindal case – MP Shobha Karandlaje

Udupi: The Udupi-Chikkamagaluru district MP Shobha Karandlaje alleged that the Congress-JD(S) coalition has received “Commission” for selling 3,667 acres of land that has rich iron ore deposits to JSW steel in Ballari district, at a press meet held in Manipal here, on June 10.

Addressing the mediapersons Shobha said, “There is no urgency to convert the lease agreement of the land into a sale deed, thus giving ownership rights of the land to the company. The company has violated the agreement. BJP will hold a three-day protest in Bengaluru against the government’s decision to sell 3,667 acres of land to Jindal. If the decision is not taken back and if the need arises, we have decided to hold a state-wide protest as well.”

“Udupi city is facing acute water scarcity and the government is not showing any interest to solve the problem. Even though the elections to 109 ULBs in the state were held eight months ago, the delay in the announcement of the reservation list to the post of president and vice-president had stalled development works in ULBs. The government should allow the process of electing president and vice-president in these ULBs. The government is not showing interest in getting the stay order vacated”, she said while accusing the Chief Minister of being preoccupied in safeguarding his chair.

Karandlaje further said, “The State government and the Udupi district Deputy Commissioner have failed to respond to the woes of the common man and have failed to ensure the availability of sand in the district. The Deputy Commissioner is not interested in solving the crisis. We will continue our fight until the sand is made available to the common man.”

“The coalition government has neglected the drought situation in the state. Drought is prevailing in 160 taluks and there are no funds to take up rehabilitation work. Besides that, there is a paucity of funds to take up the rejuvenation work of the existing water bodies.” She accused the state government of not releasing funds for any drought-relief work.

Shobha Karandlaje also said that her main focus was expediting the doubling of tracks on the Konkan Railway route in the coming years. The Konkan railway track-doubling project will receive a fillip this time, she said.
