Heat waves strikes North India: Five surprising ways and tricks to help you stay cool

New Delhi:

With a blistering 46.8 degree and 44.8 degrees, Delhi is at the worst time of the year again with the India Meteorological Department even issuing a red-colour warning for NCR. Residents as such, have been advised to limit moving out when the temperature soars which can, and have been proven to be dangerous.

While staying indoor and chucking down gallons of water might be the immediate escape for the blistering heat, there are also ways, ways you didn’t know, that can help you stay cool.

Below are some of the surprising ways and tricks that can help you stay cool:

Rinse your wrists: While this may sound unusual either your wrists or your feet with cold water before you hit the sack can help your body cool and relaxed also helping you fall asleep easier.

Keep your moisturisers in the fridge: Moisturisers are a must regardless of what the weather may be. To get the much-needed rejuvenation before the start of the day, keep your moisturisers in the fried before applying to your body to get the cooling affect.

Go cotton: Cotton is your best when it comes to Summer. Opting for lightweight cotton clothing with whites and creams, as these are more likely to reflect the sun's radiation, keeping the heat away.

Snack instead of eating heavy meals: Metabolic heat is needed to break down food and the heavier food you consume, the warmer you body gets as it works to process the heavier meals.

Turn off the lights: This easy trick often ignored trick can help you fall asleep faster if you are struggling on the bed. This is because light bulbs, even environmentally-friendly CFLs give off heat.

While turning on the air conditioners is the quickest ways to stay cool, frequent use of ac only adds to the prevailing heat as they are part of the greenhouse gases that trap heat and lead to depletion of the ozone layer. It is hence, always wise to go old school when you can, to make the environment for you better while also making you stay cool.

For all the Latest Lifestyle News, Others News, Download News Nation Android and iOS Mobile Apps.
