This Monstrous Trash Pile Is Killing Locals—and Only Getting Bigger

With nearly 80 billion pounds of trash (and counting) spread across four official dumping sites, India is facing a waste crisis that is killing its citizens and worsening air and water quality.

A dump site in New Delhi has been nicknamed 'Mt. Everest' due to its massive and increasing size.

The pile is so dangerously large that India's Supreme Court has said warning lights need to be added for aircraft visibility.

Ghazipur, one of New Delhi's gargantuan trash piles, has grown at an alarming rate since it opened in 1984 and reached capacity in 2002—just like New Delhi's other notorious dumps. The trash pile is so massive that it's been nicknamed 'Mt. Everest' by locals, and it should have been closed nearly two decades ago.

As of publication, the pile stands at 213 feet tall—the height of the London Bridge towers. It's estimated that Ghazipur will become taller than the Taj Mahal, which stands at 240 feet, within the next year.

According to an anonymous New Delhi municipal official, Ghazipur receives nearly 2,000 tons of additional trash each day.

Ghazipur grows at the rate of approximately 33 feet every year, and has swelled so much in size that India's Supreme Court now says the pile is overdue for warning signals to alert passing aircraft of the crash hazard.

Unfortunately, Ghazipur isn't the only mountain of garbage that New Delhi has to deal with. There are several monstrously overgrown trash piles that are detrimental to the health of locals, and outright deadly for people who get caught in garbage avalanches.

It's not uncommon for doctors to see multiple patients a day—many of whom are infants and children—for respiratory and stomach problems caused by the polluted air and contaminated water. According to Science Alert, "it's estimated that Delhi saw 981 deaths from acute respiratory infection," from 2013 to 2017.

Sadly, those numbers are not surprising when you consider that New Delhi is the most polluted capital in the world, and, at 21 million people strong, one of the most populated cities, to boot.

India is aware of its waste problem and has vowed to cut its single-use plastic by 2022, but it remains to be seen what will become of the towering trash piles that plague major cities and continue growing by the day.

Daisy Hernandez Daisy writes for Runner's World, Bicycling, and Popular Mechanics.

This content is created and maintained by a third party, and imported onto this page to help users provide their email addresses. You may be able to find more information about this and similar content at piano.io
