Cyclone Vayu intensifies: Key developments from Saurashtra, Kutch, Kerala, Lakshwadeep and Mumbai

Heavy rains lashed Mumbai on Monday (Representative Image) | Photo Credit: BCCL

Mumbai: Heavy rains lashed at the city of Mumbai and parts of Gujarat on Monday courtesy a deep depression in the Arabian Sea which has intensified into what is being known as Cyclone Vayu. The Indian Meteorological Department (IMD) has issued a warning in this regard, asking concerned officials to expect heavy rainfall in the Konkan region. In addition, the government agency has also advised senior officials to take precautionary measures and instruct the officers reporting to them to do the same.

In the early hours of Tuesday, weather agencies such as Skymet Weather confirmed that the deep depression over the east-central and adjoining Southeast Arabian Sea has "finally intensified into Cyclonic Storm Vayu." As the cyclone develops, here are key developments you should know.

Projections assert that the system is heading towards the Saurashtra Coast, a peninsular region in the state of Gujarat. Also known as Kathiawar, this region covers 11 districts, including Rajkot. Other parts of the state such as Kutch are also expected to witness heavy rainfall. In a press release, IMD predicted widespread rainfall with heavy falls at isolated places in Kerala and Coastal Karnataka for Tuesday. Isolated places in Kerala are likely to experience widespread rainfall with heavy to very heavy falls, said the release while advising inhabitants to be prepared. The weather agency has also hinted at widespread rainfall in Lakshwadeep from June 11 through June 14. This prediction has been categorised in the 'green category' which notifies no cause for warning. Similar reports about rainfall at a few places in South Interior Karnataka have also been issued by the government agency.

DDGM, IMD Mumbai, KS Hosalikar: Mumbai will also be affected #VayuCyclone but not severely. Cyclone is expected to cross from 250-300 km away, parallel to the Mumbai coast tomorrow, early morning. A cyclonic warning has been issued for fishermen & people living near the coastline https://t.co/JWtsPUKwIw — ANI (@ANI) June 11, 2019
