Mumbai: 35-year-old autorickshaw driver arrested for threatening to behead traffic constable

In a bizarre incident, on Sunday night, a 35-year-old autorickshaw driver was arrested for allegedly threatening to behead a traffic constable.

According to Hindustan Times, the autorickshaw driver was arrested at Khar Danda. The driver threatened to behead a traffic constable who stopped him near Khar railway station on Sunday afternoon and was asked to pay Rs 5,000 for driving into a no-entry zone. The driver was identified as Deepak Sharma. A police officer told the leading daily, “He [Sharma] had a lot of pending fines and the constable asked him to pay the whole amount. That agitated him.”

After this, Sharma got into an altercation with the traffic constable and fled from the spot. Later, after a few minutes, Sharma returned and threw a letter at the constable, which stated that he will behead the constable and place his head inside the Khar police station on Monday morning. Later, the constable approached Khar police to file a complaint against Sharma. That is when the cops found out that the accused had several non-cognisable offences registered against him. Another police officer told the Hindustan Times, “We took his threat seriously because he has created a ruckus in the past. He has temper issues.”

The cops later began to track Sharma. At first, they tracked Sharma at Carter Road but he gave them a slip. Sharma also managed to escape when the police found him near National College. But around 11 pm, the police received information that Sharma was at Khar Danda, that is when the cops arrested him. Police have booked Sharma under sections 506 (2) (criminal intimidation) and 186 (obstructing public servant in discharge of public functions) of the Indian Penal Code (IPC).

(To receive our E-paper on whatsapp daily, please click here. We permit sharing of the paper's PDF on WhatsApp and other social media platforms.)

Published on: Tuesday, June 11, 2019, 11:22 AM IST
