Yuva Sena chief Aaditya Thackeray: Shiv Sena chief Uddhav Thackeray will decide on whether I should fight elections

Yuva Sena

Aaditya Thackeray

Uddhav Thackeray

Mumbai

Maharashtra

chiefhas said that Shiv Sena party president, his fatherwill decide on whether he should fight the state assembly elections slated for October this year or not.Aaditya was talking to Sena office bearers and legislators from the Mahim and Worli assembly segments while taking a review of the party’s performance during the Lok Sabha elections and preparing for the assembly elections. Aaditya’s comments come at a time when there is speculation that he will fight the state assembly elections from Worli or Sewree.“Whether I should fight the assembly elections or not, this decision will be taken by Uddhav saheb and senior party leaders,” Aaditya reportedly told the leaders. Senior Sena minister Subhash Desai, Mahim legislator Sada Sarvankar, Worli legislator Sunil Shinde and other office bearers from the two assembly constituencies were present for the review meeting held on Monday evening.Aaditya asked party functionaries to review the voting pattern in the Lok Sabha elections and work on areas where the Sena got less votes and explore the reasons why the party did badly in some areas.Senior Sena leaders close to Matoshree, the Thackeray residence, said that though no decision has been taken yet. Aaditya was likely to fight the assembly elections. If senior leaders are to be believed, Aaditya is likely to fight from the Sena strong hold of Central, from either the Worli or Sewree assembly segments.If he does contest, the 28-year-old Sena scion would become the first Thackeray to actually fight elections. Aaditya who is now the chief of the Yuva Sena and a leader of the Sena, is the third generation of the Thackeray’s in active politics. Neither his grand father Sena founder late Bal Thackeray nor his father Sena president Uddhav Thackeray have contested elections before.In an Instagram post indicating that the party cadre was batting for Aaditya’s electoral debut, Aaditya's cousin and Yuva Sena leader Varun Sardesai urged him to fight the assembly elections. “This is the time, this is the opportunity. Mission legislative assembly 2019.is waiting - Aaditya Thackeray,” Varun said in his recent Instagram post creating a flutter in Sena circles. Varun was on the Sena's list of star campaigners for the Lok Sabha elections.
