Filmmaker Anurag Kashyap slams a troll on Twitter after being called a hypocrite

Anurag Kashyap slams a Twitter troll

Anurag Kashyap is once again in the news for his eventful Twitter account. The filmmaker was recently trolled after a Twitter user called him a hypocrite following his tweet about the 2-and-a-half-year-old’s murder in Aligarh. However, the filmmaker slammed the Twitter user saying that it is not okay to use an infant’s death to create an atmosphere of riots. It all began when Anurag tweeted out a link of a report from TOI.

“Fake videos and rumours have created a riot like situation in Aligarh,” Anurag had written in his tweet. To which, the troll made a reference to his tweet to Prime Minister Narendra Modi about the death threat that his daughter received on social media. The troll went on to call him a hypocrite asking for aid when his daughter’s safety was in questions but not encouraging outrage when a young infant’s murder is in question.

Fake videos and rumours have created a riot like situation in Aligarh https://t.co/g73dEHbr9i — Anurag Kashyap (@anuragkashyap72) June 10, 2019

Entitled Bollywoodia tags PMO when someone threatens his daughter on Instagram. But the 2.5 year old brutalised and murdered should not call for anger of the common man. https://t.co/zly8OBWIYm — Divya (@divya_16_) June 11, 2019

To this, Anurag, as mentioned earlier, stated that while murdering an infant in a heinous crime and the culprit should be punished with the harshest of punishments there is, but he believes that using such an incident to instigate communal riots is unacceptable.

“Murder of a child is as heinous a crime as it can be and there should be action and there was. Criminals were arrested. But taking it further to say there was rape, and dismembering of the body and eyes gouged out which didn’t happen and then creating an atmosphere of riots. No,” Anurag Kashyap’s reply to the troll, read.

Murder of a child is as heinous a crime as it can be and there should be action and there was. Criminals were arrested. But taking it further to say there was rape, and dismembering of the body and eyes gouged out which didn’t happen and then creating an atmosphere of riots. No — Anurag Kashyap (@anuragkashyap72) June 11, 2019

As mentioned earlier, this isn’t the first in recent times, when Anurag has engaged in a war of words on Twitter. On May 23, after the Indian Prime Minister, Narendra Modi was sworn in, the filmmaker had tweeted to the PM congratulating him for getting a second term. However, he also complained to Modi after a Twitter user had threatened his daughter with rape and murder.

“Dear @narendramodi sir. Congratulations on your victory and thank you for the message of inclusiveness. Sir please also tell us how do we deal with these followers of yours who celebrate your victory by threatening my daughter with messages like this for me being your dissenter,” Anurag’s tweet to PM Modi, read.

However, co-producer of the Accidental Prime Minister, Ashoke Pandit questioned the authenticity of Anurag’s complaint and the two had quite a public spat on social media. Eventually, it was reported that Anurag had taken the assistance of the law and filed an offcial complaint against the Twitter user at a local police station in Mumbai.
