Gujarat on alert for Cyclone `Vayu'

Gujarat on alert for Cyclone `Vayu'

Gujarat has been put on high alert after the Indian Meteorological Department warned of a depression building in the Arabian Sea, which is likely to develop into a severe cyclonic storm.

The IMD has forecast heavy rain in coastal areas of Saurashtra region in next few days

The government has decided to deploy National Disaster Response Force (NDRF) personnel in coastal areas of Saurashtra and Kutch from Tuesday morning, owing to likely storm and heavy rain.

The government will also put the Army, the Navy and the Coast Guard on alert.

According to the IMD, heavy rain is likely on Thursday and Friday in the coastal areas of Saurashtra and Kutch, with winds blowing at a speed of over 110 kmph.

The government has advised fishermen against venturing into the sea in the next few days, while ports have been directed to flag a danger signal.

“A heavy rain warning has been issued for Saurashtra and Kutch on June 13 and 14 due to the depression in the Arabian Sea, which will turn into a severe cyclonic storm,” state meteorological department director Jayanta Sarkar said.

On Monday, the State government held a high-level meeting, in which it decided to deploy 15 teams of the NDRF immediately in the coastal districts.

“We have alerted all district collectors of coastal Gujarat to take immediate steps, keeping in mind the likelihood of a cyclone,” additional chief secretary, revenue, Pankaj Kumar, told reporters.

“Besides, we have called a meeting of all the defence forces. We have decided to deploy 15 teams of the NDRF in the coastal areas of Saurashtra and Kutch from tomorrow [Wednesday] morning. We have asked the Army, Navy, Air Force and Coast Guard to remain ready to help the State,” he said, adding that the government was monitoring the situation with the Met Department and Indian Space Research Organisation.

On Monday, the depression over the south-east adjoining Lakshadweep and east-central Arabian Sea moved northwards with a speed of about 31 kmph.

“It lay centred at 8.30 a.m. on Monday near latitude 12.5N and longitude 71.0E over east-central and adjoining south-east Arabian Sea and Lakshadweep area, about 240 km northwest of Aminidivi (Lakshadweep), 760 km south-southwest of Mumbai (Maharashtra) and 930 km south-southeast of Veraval (Gujarat),” a Met release stated.

It is very likely to intensify further into a deep depression during the next six hours, a cyclonic storm during the subsequent 24 hours and a severe cyclonic storm thereafter.

The IMD said the cyclonic storm ‘Vayu’ which lay over east-central Arabian Sea moved northwards with a speed of about 15 kmph in the last six hours and lay centred at 0830 hrs IST of today (11 June 2019) near latitude 15.0°N and longitude 70.6°E over eastcentral Arabian Sea, about 350 km west-southwest of Goa, 510 km south-southwest of Mumbai and 650 km nearly south of Veraval (Gujarat). It is very likely to intensify further into a severe cyclonic storm during next 12 hours, the Indian Meteorological Department (IMD) stated in a release.

It is very likely to move nearly northwards and cross Gujarat coast between Porbandar and Mahuva around Veraval and Diu region as a severe cyclonic storm with wind speed 110-120 kmph gusting to 135 kmph during early morning of 13 June 2019, the IMD added.

It also warned of widespread rainfall with heavy to very heavy falls at few places and extremely heavy falls at isolated places.

Gale wind speed reaching 70-80 kmph gusting to 90 kmph over east-central Arabian Sea and 50-60 kmph gusting to 70 kmph along and off North Maharashtra coast by the evening today.

It is very likely to be 40-50 kmph gusting to 60 kmph over Lakshadweep area, Kerala, Karnataka and south Maharashtra coasts.

Wind speed is very likely to increase further becoming gale wind speed reaching 110-120 kmph gusting to 135 kmph over eastcentral and adjoining northeast Arabian Sea by 12 night. It is very likely to be 60-70 kmph gusting to 80 kmph over Gujarat coast from 12 morning and become gale wind speed reaching 110-120 kmph gusting to 135 kmph by 12 night. It is very likely to be 50-60 kmph gusting to 70 kmph over Maharashtra coast.

Gale wind speed of the order of 110-120 kmph gusting to 135 kmph is very likely over north Arabian Sea and Gujarat coast in morning hours and decrease gradually thereafter. It is very likely to be 50-60 kmph gusting to 70 kmph over north Maharashtra coasts and northern parts of east-central Arabian Sea, IMD said.

The sea condition is very likely to be high to very high over east-central Arabian Sea on 11 June and is very likely to become very high to phenomenal over east-central and adjoining northeast Arabian Sea and Gujarat coast from 12 evening and over north Arabian Sea on 13 June 2019, IMD stated.

The sea condition is very likely to be rough over Lakshadweep area, along and off Kerala, Karnataka and south Maharashtra coasts on 11; rough to very rough along and off Maharashtra Coast on 12; very rough to high along and off Gujarat, north Maharashtra coasts and northern parts of east-central Arabian Sea on 13 June 2019, it added.
