Mamata Banerjee's Kolkata rally updates: Akhilesh Yadav accuses BJP of disappointing masses; Farooq Abdullah bats for EVM-free polls-Politics News , Firstpost

Mamata Banerjee rally in Kolkata LIVE updates: Shortly after the United India rally came to a close, former Madhya Pradesh chief minister Shivraj Singh Chouhan took to Twitter to respond to the Opposition show of strength. 'Too many saints can ruin a monastery,' he wrote adding that '22 parties, a few MPs and a few prime minister aspirants...who can stop one from dreaming big?'

Auto refresh feeds

In addition, commandos will be deployed at Dum Dum, Esplanade and Maidan Stations. A dog squad will also be deployed.

Additional Railway Protection Force (RPF) Personnel, have been deployed at all stations to tackle any untoward incidents. Women RPF personnel will also be deployed in adequate numbers at various stations.

Anticipating a heavy rush of commuters in view of the TMC mega opposition rally at the Brigade Parade Ground on Saturday, the Kolkata Metro, which operates under the Ministry of Railways, has beefed up its security arrangements by deploying additional forces apart from the regular contingent.

West Bengal chief minister Mamata Banerjee on Friday met with leaders of various Opposition parties, including AIADMK chief MK Stalin and TDP leader N Chandrababu Naidu, in Kolkata. The meeting comes a day before the TMC supremo's mega Opposition rally on Saturday against the Narendra Modi government.

More than 20 national leaders, including former prime minister HD Deve Gowda, former Union ministers Yashwant Sinha, Shatrughan Sinha and Arun Shourie; three present chief ministers Arvind Kejriwal, Chandrababu Naidu and HD Kumaraswamy; and former chief ministers Farooq Abdullah, Omar Abdullah, Akhilesh Yadav and Gegong Apang will attend the meeting, TMC sources said. Most of them have already arrived in the city.

"By putting the traffic on standstill and harassing the general public, TMC wants to stand up for the state’s well fare? How ironical! I urge all to share their today's traffic woes," he tweeted, with the hashtag #NaMoAgain.

BJP leader Babul Supriyo on Saturday launched an attack on the TMC government for holding the rally in Kolkata and disrupting traffic.

(They are all tired and defeated heavyweights looking to try their luck in the ring. If the first Opposition alliance (in Karnataka) is in such a dire condition, what will happen henceforth?)

Union minister for Minority Affairs Mukhtar Abbas Naqvi, while speaking to ANI about the Opposition rally in Kolkata, said: "Ye sab thake huye pite huye pehelwan hain jo akhaade mein ja kar phir apni qismat aazmana chahte hain. Pehla gathbandhan (in Karnataka) hi is haal mein hai toh aage kya hoga."

The most conspicuous absence from Banerjee's rally will be that of Congress president Rahul Gandhi and former Congress president Sonia Gandhi.

Among the list of politicians who will attend West Bengal chief minister's rally are Nationalist Congress Party (NCP) chief Sharad Pawar and former Uttar Pradesh chief minister Akhilesh Yadav, who have also met Banerjee ahead of the event.

As hundreds of people are marching towards the Brigade Parade ground to attend the TMC-led rally from across the city, the Kolkata traffic police took to Twitter to warn commuters of potential traffic hotspots in the city.

Shourie has been a vocal critic of the BJP government, and has accused Prime Minister Narendra Modi of being personally responsible for the Rafale deal . he , along with Yashwant Sinha have also accused Modi of "compromising national security" by unilaterally finalising the deal, shunning every rule of military procurement.

Speaking about the BJP's shady dealings in terms of the defence agreement, Shourie said, "no government that destroyed the defence sector as much as this government has, no government was involved in as big a corruption scandal as this government is. Had opposition been united, they wouldn't have been able to win Gujarat."

Former BJP leader Arun Shourie brought up the controversial Rafale deal in his address, and said that "no other government has said so many lies. Never before were institutions undermined in this manner."

He also accused the BJP of stealing votes, and condemned the EVM system for polls. "EVMs should be destroyed because they are being used to steal votes... we should all go to the Election Commission," he said.

"Fires are being spread in Assam in North East. We have to sacrifice, before asking people we should lead by making the sacrifice. Every community will have to make sacrifices. Look at Jammu and Kashmir. At what state has it been left in. People are being killed everywhere. And it is said that they are Pakistanis, they are traitors," he said.

Former Jammu and Kashmir chief minister Farooq Abdullah accused the BJP of dividing the nation on the basis of caste and religion, and blamed it for the condition of his home state.

"Our only aim is BJP hatao, Modi Hatao, desh bachao," (Get rid of the BJP, Get rid of Modi, save the nation) he said.

AIADMK chief MK Stalin said that the upcoming Lok Sabha polls will be the nation's second freedom fight, adding that the BJP is only attacking the Opposition as the party is well aware that it cannot win.

After Akhilesh Yadav and Mayawati's press conference, Rahul had said he "won't be disappointed about the BSP-Samajwadi Party alliance as long as the BJP does not come to power", adding that contesting the elections solo would have the same end result — "the BJP won't get their seats".

The Congress has appeared nonchalant about the BSP-SP alliance , with party president Rahul Gandhi saying soon after the announcement on Saturday that being left of the alliance in Uttar Pradesh was not a "setback" for the Congress, exuding confidence that the results of the elections "would surprise people".

Satish Mishra of the Bahujan Samaj Party (BSP), the party which recently pushed out the Congress joined hands with the Samajwadi Party in Uttar Pradesh, said that the nation "cannot tolerate the NDA government any longer" because the government is "fooling the Indian people."

Mamata Banerjee responded immediately, saying" "You get BJP down to zero seats in UP and we'll do the same in Bengal."

"People used to think that an alliance is not possible but when SP and BSP tied up on 12 January, we received a good response from people around. Now, we are focusing on a bigger alliance here. Imagine, the kind to heartfelt response we'll get," he said.

Speaking about the SP's alliance with the BSP, Yadav said: "Since we allied, BJP is holding meetings after meetings, to find how to win one seat in UP."

Launching an attack on the BJP over the ongoing infighting with the CBI, SP president Akhilesh Yadav said that the BJP has formed its own gathbandhan with the investigation agency and the CVC.

"Women, who had accumulated some wealth for their families' benefit by hiding cash in drawers and behind closets, were left in limbo when note ban happened. Their savings all vanished," Sinha said, adding that even before people could get over demonetisation, GST happened.

He further criticised the BJP's plan for demonetisation and said it was announced in haste. "They announced without considering the people and other senior party leaders," he said.

BJP rebel and veteran party leader Shatrughan Sinha also addressed the gathering, and said that he has not seen such a lively and huge crowd before, and credited it to "the magic of our leader, Mamata Banerjee."

"I understand it is election time. New promises and conversations are being brought up, but no performance can be seen. There is a large gap between the BJP's promises and performance.

Urging Prime Minister Narendra Modi to come clean about the details of the Rafale deal, Shatrughan Sinha said that unless the Centre does not speak now, they will continue to hear Congress' "chowkidaar chor hai" slogan.

Narendra Modi may be the chowkidaar (watchman), but the masses are the thanedaar (station officer), says Tejashwi Yadav. "If you make a mistake, the thanedaar will make sure you see consequences," he added.

Shortly after arriving at the Brigade Parade grounds, RJD leader Tejashwai Yadav reiterated that the Opposition must remain united, adding that the masses will not be intimidated by the BJP's tactics.

"The Narendra Modi's government has an expiry date. I promise we will work together and fight together. I am taking a vow today that we will work together. Kejriwal said right things: Pakistan failed in its motive but Modi did the damage. Modi thinks he is saint and rest are corrupt."

Saying that the Opposition party is hitting out at the Prime Minister because he has been doing the same, TMC leader Mamata Banerjee addressed the crowed in Bengali. "There is a lakshman rekha in politics that you should not cross. PM targeted everyone. Then why should we not target him? He claims he is clean but look at all the scams his govt is involved in. Things change, even weather changes, then why shouldn't the government change," Banerjee said.

Responding to the BJP's inquiry about the leader of the united Opposition front, the TMC leader said: "They are worried who will become our leader. We all are leaders here. You don't have to worry. Post elections we will decide who to become prime minister. BJP has become leaderless. That is why they have one party president and one prime minister

West Bengal BJP leader and former TMC leader Mukul Roy on Saturday took to Twitter to condemn the Opposition met, saying that West Bengal is once again witnessing a "circus" under Mamata Banerjee's rule, similar to what Jyoti Basu had faced.

Shortly after the United India rally came to a close, former Madhya Pradesh chief minister Shivraj Singh Chouhan took to Twitter to respond to the Opposition show of strength. "Too many saints can ruin a monastery," he wrote adding that "22 parties, a few MPs and a few prime minister aspirants...who can stop one from dreaming big?"

"I congratulate Mamata didi for getting all of us together. The BJP has disappointed the people of the nation. They have no answers to any of our questions," he said.

As united Opposition leaders spoke to media, SP leader Akhilesh Yadav thanked West Bengal chief minister Mamata Banerjee for organising the United India rally, and accused the BJP of letting down the people.

Former Jammu and Kashmir chief minister Farooq Abdullah reiterated the Opposition's demand for elections that are free of Electronic Voting Machines (EVMs), and are only paper-based.

Reiterating the BJP's questions about who will lead the Opposition parties, he said: "Someone said in a very funny manner that our leader will be elected by the people of India, you have to name your leader to be elected by the people of India. Rahul Gandhi, Mayawati, Mamata Ji and some regional players too, all have prime ministerial ambitions.

Speaking to ANI , Union law minister Ravi Shankar Prasad said that the Opposition parties' united front is only to defeat Prime Minister Narendra Modi, and that they have "no future road-map for the development of India."

Responding to the BJP's inquiry about the leader of the united Opposition front, the TMC leader said: "They are worried who will become our leader. We all are leaders here. You don't have to worry. Post elections we will decide who to become prime minister. BJP has become leaderless. That is why they have one party president and one prime minister

The event concluded shortly after within chants of "badal do, badal do, Dilli mein sarkar badal do" and "Jai Hind".

Emphasising the Opposition parties' unity, Mamata Banerjee said that it is 'inevitable' that a new government will be formed at the Centre, adding that this is the people's verdict.

BJP National General Secretary Kailash Vijayvargiya took to Twitter to comment on the Opposition's show of strength, and said that while the Opposition governments continue to be embroiled in scams, the Narendra Modi government continues to have a clean rap sheet.

West Bengal is again witnessing a circus under @mamataOfficial ’s rule similar to what Jyoti Basu had started. Various jokers and lying artists coming together to destroy India again. #UnitedAntiNationalsAtBrigade pic.twitter.com/A7XaOBg0ip

West Bengal BJP leader and former TMC leader Mukul Roy on Saturday took to Twitter to condemn the Opposition met, saying that West Bengal is once again witnessing a "circus" under Mamata Banerjee's rule, similar to what Jyoti Basu had faced.

Gujarat BJP secretary Pradipsinh Vaghela tweeted a fresh attack on the Opposition parties that took part in the TMC-led United India rally, and said that they are all just scared of the BJP's strength.

Shortly after the United India rally came to a close, former Madhya Pradesh chief minister Shivraj Singh Chouhan took to Twitter to respond to the Opposition show of strength. "Too many saints can ruin a monastery," he wrote adding that "22 parties, a few MPs and a few prime minister aspirants...who can stop one from dreaming big?"

"I congratulate Mamata didi for getting all of us together. The BJP has disappointed the people of the nation. They have no answers to any of our questions," he said.

As united Opposition leaders spoke to media, SP leader Akhilesh Yadav thanked West Bengal chief minister Mamata Banerjee for organising the United India rally, and accused the BJP of letting down the people.

Former Jammu and Kashmir chief minister Farooq Abdullah reiterated the Opposition's demand for elections that are free of Electronic Voting Machines (EVMs), and are only paper-based.

Union Minister Ravi Shankar Prasad on Opposition’s rally in Kolkata: Those who could not see eye to eye have come together & from the speech it was evident that their only agenda is to remove Narendra Modi, they have no future road-map for the development of India. pic.twitter.com/cHNfC5tjKU

Reiterating the BJP's questions about who will lead the Opposition parties, he said: "Someone said in a very funny manner that our leader will be elected by the people of India, you have to name your leader to be elected by the people of India. Rahul Gandhi, Mayawati, Mamata Ji and some regional players too, all have prime ministerial ambitions.

Speaking to ANI , Union law minister Ravi Shankar Prasad said that the Opposition parties' united front is only to defeat Prime Minister Narendra Modi, and that they have "no future road-map for the development of India."

Mamata Banerjee rally in Kolkata LATEST updates: Speaking to ANI, Union law minister Ravi Shankar Prasad said that the Opposition parties' united front is only to defeat Prime Minister Narendra Modi, and that they have "no future road-map for the development of India."

Reiterating the BJP's questions about who will lead the Opposition parties, he said: "Someone said in a very funny manner that our leader will be elected by the people of India, you have to name your leader to be elected by the people of India. Rahul Gandhi, Mayawati, Mamata Ji and some regional players too, all have prime ministerial ambitions.

As united Opposition leaders spoke to media, SP leader Akhilesh Yadav thanked West Bengal chief minister Mamata Banerjee for organising the United India rally, and accused the BJP of letting down the people.

"I congratulate Mamata didi for getting all of us together. The BJP has disappointed the people of the nation. They have no answers to any of our questions," he said.

Shortly after the United India rally came to a close, former Madhya Pradesh chief minister Shivraj Singh Chouhan took to Twitter to respond to the Opposition show of strength. "Too many saints can ruin a monastery," he wrote adding that "22 parties, a few MPs and a few prime minister aspirants...who can stop one from dreaming big?"

Emphasising the Opposition parties' unity, Mamata Banerjee said that it is 'inevitable' that a new government will be formed at the Centre, adding that this is the people's verdict.

The event concluded shortly after within chants of "badal do, badal do, Dilli mein sarkar badal do" and "Jai Hind".

Responding to the BJP's inquiry about the leader of the united Opposition front, the TMC leader said: "They are worried who will become our leader. We all are leaders here. You don't have to worry. Post elections we will decide who to become prime minister. BJP has become leaderless. That is why they have one party president and one prime minister

Saying that the Opposition party is hitting out at the Prime Minister because he has been doing the same, TMC leader Mamata Banerjee addressed the crowd in Bengali. "There is a lakshman rekha in politics that you should not cross. PM targeted everyone. Then why should we not target him? He claims he is clean but look at all the scams his govt is involved in. Things change, even weather changes, then why shouldn't the government change," Banerjee said.

"The Narendra Modi's government has an expiry date. I promise we will work together and fight together. I am taking a vow today that we will work together. Kejriwal said right things: Pakistan failed in its motive but Modi did the damage. Modi thinks he is saint and rest are corrupt."

Shortly after arriving at the Brigade Parade grounds, RJD leader Tejashwai Yadav reiterated that the Opposition must remain united, adding that the masses will not be intimidated by the BJP's tactics. He said Narendra Modi may be the chowkidaar (watchman), but the masses are the thanedaars (station officers), adding: "If you make a mistake, the thanedaars will make sure you face consequences."

Former prime minister HD Deve Gowda, whom Mamata Banerjee described as "a farmers' prime minister, not an accidental one", told the crowd: "The Centre is victimising leaders of Opposition parties using all machinery". He also urged senior regional leaders to prepare a manifesto together to take the united Opposition forward. "I was the prime minister for a short time. I know that a stable nation is important to build the a country," he said. "We need to instill confidence among the people by telling them about our action plan."

Congress leader Mallikarjun Kharge read out a letter from UPA president Sonia Gandhi, which detailed the "immense strain" India is facing. "Economically, our citizens have been squeezed. Politically, our institutions have been undermined. And socially, our fabric stands eviscerated.... The upcoming general elections will be on the faith of restoring democracy in our country."

He added that it is essential for the Opposition to be united if the Narendra Modi-Amit Shah duo is to be defeated. "The BJP is trying to break away parties, it is trying to break everyone," he said. "Modi may not be corrupt personally, but he is letting his friends have all privileges."

More than 20 national leaders, including former prime minister HD Deve Gowda; former Union ministers Yashwant Sinha, Shatrughan Sinha and Arun Shourie; three present chief ministers Arvind Kejriwal, N Chandrababu Naidu and HD Kumaraswamy; and former chief ministers Farooq Abdullah, Omar Abdullah, Akhilesh Yadav and Gegong Apang; are at the rally.

Though Congress president Rahul Gandhi and his mother Sonia Gandhi skipped the rally, the party is represented by senior Congress leaders like Mallikarjun Kharge and Abhishek Manu Singhvi. On Friday, Rahul had written to the TMC chief, extending support to the mega rally. "We commend the great people of Bengal who have historically been at the forefront of defending our ideals. I extend my support to Mamata Di on this show of unity and hope that we send a powerful message of a united India together," the letter read.

"I have met Deve Gowda-ji, Hemant-ji (Hemant Soren of Jharkhand Mukti Morcha) and Akhilesh Yadav. I will meet other Opposition leaders too," Banerjee told reporters. With Bharatiya Janata Party's recent defeats in the Hindi heartland states of Rajasthan, Madhya Pradesh and Chhattisgarh, Banerjee has raised the pitch to be united against the saffron party in the 2019 general election. Bahujan Samaj Party general secretary Satish Chandra Mishra, Nationalist Congress Party supremo Sharad Pawar, Samajwadi Party supremo Akhilesh Yadav, National Conference president Farooq Abdullah, too, have already arrived. The other leaders will either arrive on Friday night or by Saturday morning, the sources said.

Large scale preparations were made to ensure the success of the rally. Besides the huge stages, 20 watch towers, 1,000 microphones and 30 LED screens have been put up so spectators can see and hear the speeches of the leaders clearly. Lakhs of TMC supporters and workers attending the rally, a huge number of them from various corners of the state, have been accommodated in the outskirts of the city and in some auditoriums and stadiums.

As many as 10,000 police personnel have been deployed and around 400 police pickets have been set up to ensure foolproof security, police said. Policemen in plain clothes, personnel of the Rapid Action Force and Quick Response Team have been deployed at the rally venue. Police postings began at 4 am, with senior officials in the rank of assistant commissioners in charge of the five daises set up for the rally, a senior police officer said.

Also, anticipating heavy rush of commuters in the wake of the TMC-led rally at the Brigade Parade Ground, the Kolkata Metro, which operates under the Ministry of Railways, beefed up its security arrangements by deploying additional forces apart from the regular contingent.

With inputs from PTI
