Gujarat gears up for Very Severe Cyclone Vayu, heavy rains and damaging winds to reach soon

Weather News and Analysis

Skymet Weather Team

Gujarat is gearing up for heavy to extremely heavy rains as Very Severe Cyclonic storm Vayu is nearing the coast. The system is presently centered at Latitude 18°N and Longitude 70.3°E, 230 km west­-southwest of Mumbai and 290 km nearly south of Veraval.

Cyclone Vayu is the first cyclone to hit the Gujarat coast in the last one decade.

The system is moving at a fast pace, with a speed of 11 kmph in northward direction. The system is most likely to make landfall over Saurashtra coast of Gujarat around west of Veraval as a Very Severe Cyclonic Storm by late tonight or wee hours of June 13.

According to weathermen, the storm is tracking well, maintaining its intensity and surely attacking and threatening Saurashtra coast. The storm is currently equivalent to a Category 2 Hurricane, packing wind speed of 150 kmph.

The storm has a damaging potential and will bring in life threatening rains to Gujarat along with high velocity winds. The combination of heavy rains and ferocious winds could harm weak infrastructures and inundate low lying areas.

Evacuation has been done, less than 24 hours left, all the evacuation should complete by evening. Rains will begin evening itself, increasing gradually, all these measures should be complete by evening. Clouding has already reached coastal areas of Gujarat.

Parts of Diu, Veraval, Amreli, Junagarh, Gir, Somnath, Jamnagar will see heavy to very heavy rains. Interiors including Rajkot may also see some heavy showers as Cyclone Vayu is heading straight to Saurashtra.

Porbandar and Mahuva in particular should remain on alert as Vayu will make landfall in between these cities around Diu and Veraval. Cities of Okha and Dwarka are also expected to see some very heavy showers. After the Cyclone hits, parts of Kutch, Naliya, Mandvi will be seeing rains. It would be accompanied with squally winds to the tune of 145­-155 kmph gusting up to 170 kmph.

Taking Cyclone Vayu into consideration, Western Railway has cancelled many trains in Gujarat covering cities of Bhavnagar, Veraval, Okha, Porbandar and Bhuj. Train services will remain suspended until June 14 morning.

Flights from Ahmedabad going to Kandla, Porbandar, Diu, Mundra, Bhavnagar for tomorrow have been cancelled.

Image Credit:en.wikipedia.org

Any information taken from here should be credited to skymetweather.com
