huawei: Vodafone Idea, Airtel in talks with Samsung for 4G and 5G amid uncertainty over Huawei's future, Telecom News, ET Telecom

NEW DELHI: Vodafone Idea and Bharti Airtel have initiated separate exploratory talks with Korean telecom gear maker Samsung for supplying equipment for their respective 4G and futuristic 5G networks even as uncertainty looms over the future of Huawei in India, after a US ban on the Chinese vendor.Both Bharti Airtel and Vodafone India don't want to get stuck with just two vendors — Ericsson and Nokia — in case of a ban on Huawei, as there could be demand and supply issues as well in such an eventuality, a person familiar with the strategy of one of the two telecom companies said."They want to keep their options open with Samsung. ZTE is there but the telcos wouldn’t want to go big with it...telcos want to diversify when it comes to vendors," the person said.A second person said that Samsung is already getting “feelers” from telcos in India for both 4G and 5G technologies. “There are feelers on 5G. But, there are many steps required, including trials in India since commercial deployment has some time to start in the country. Even on 4G, Samsung is getting feelers from the two telcos”.Both market leader Vodafone Idea and Bharti Airtel operate in a multi-vendor environment, but the former's exposure to Chinese vendors, especially Huawei, increased lately after awarding new contracts to modernise and expand its 4G network in seven circles. Bharti Airtel also uses Huawei’s 4G equipment in several circles. Samsung so far works only with Reliance Jio in India.Bharti Airtel declined to comment, while Vodafone Idea and Samsung didn't respond to ET's queries.The talks come with the Indian government yet to take a final view on whether Huawei will be allowed to participate in 5G trials, and further in 5G commercial deployments. “There are security issues…it is not only a matter of technology, where their participation in 5G is concerned,” new telecom minister Ravi Shankar Prasad told media last week.DoT, though, appears to be divided on the issue, given the sensitive nature of Sino-Indian diplomatic ties.A section of the DoT believes the country can’t depend on just two network equipment suppliers — Nokia and Ericsson — and point out that there are risks from European vendors as well. This section believes Huawei should be given an opportunity in the 5G trials, which will also allow India to scrutinise security vulnerabilities, if any. The other section, though, believes Chinese vendors are a serious security threat to India, given those companies are — under Chinese law — duty-bound to share information with the government.In a statement to ET, Huawei - which is now pushing India for a quick decision - said, “We hope the Indian government makes an independent and informed decision that provides a level playing field for all players for the country.”Huawei added that the gear maker has always been open and transparent in its engagements in India. "...we are optimistic of the future, including all road maps and plans for India, which includes 5G trials and commercial rollouts in due course. We firmly believe that as a front runner in 5G, Huawei’s participation will be hugely beneficial for the safer, faster and smarter deployment of this technology in India."Indian telcos, through their industry body COAI, have also sought clarity from the government on the use of Huawei equipment at the earliest to enable operators to take a long-term view in investment decisions since billions of dollars are at stake.“There are clearly concerns…we are basically saying that operators have already deployed Huawei equipment in the 4G network and the govt has not given any instruction… telcos will move forward into 5G and there is no clarity if the govt will impose any type of restriction so far. None has been communicated so far,” Rajan Mathews, director general at the Cellular Operators Association of India, told ET.The first person said that Samsung is attracting a lot of traction on 5G across the globe even though it isn’t operating in too many countries. “Because of the scale it is working at, doors are being opened for Samsung globally.”Rohan Dhamija, partner & head of India &Middle East, Analysys Mason said that Samsung can tap new telcos as it could fill up the volume in the 4G-LTE environment. “They are doing well in 5G, whereby they could fetch interest from Indian telcos in India.”“Should any restrictions be imposed, operators will look at options that are most cost-effective and cause the least disruption. Operators do network swaps and know how to deal with it,” Bharat Bhargava, partner, telecom advisory services, at EY India said.Another analyst, who chose to remain anonymous, said European vendors could control pricing in the market with larger footprints in case of a ban on Huawei. In such a scenario, Samsung could help bring a balance to the market, he added.“India is a more liberal market, and will not be among the first countries to ban Huawei. But, in case of a ban, Samsung will gain along with Ericsson and Nokia. The benefit will come across all vendors,” Ashwinder Sethi, principal at Analysys Mason said.He said that Samsung is unique in India because Jio has been using it for both equipment and managed services whereas in other countries Samsung is not a usual managed services provider.The relationship between Jio and Samsung though is not exclusive in India, but despite that, the telco continues to have just a one-vendor network. Jio, in fact, had reached a proofs-of-concept (PoC) stage with Ericsson, Nokia, and Huawei in 2016 for the requirement of over 40,000 LTE sites across the country.But a third person said, “Jio continues to talk to all vendors other than Samsung for network expansion, including 5G”. Jio didn’t respond to ET’s emailed queries.Samsung currently holds just 3% of the global telecom infrastructure market compared with 28% for Huawei, according to market tracker Dell'Oro Group.Globally, Samsung’s major clients include all three US telcos firms AT&T Inc, Verizon Communications Inc and Sprint Corp for 5G technology. It also provides network technologies and equipment to South Korean and Japanese telcos
