Why IMA investors couldn’t read the writing on the wall

I Monetary Advisory

Bangalore

Photos: Bengaluru in a panic as thousands fall victim to IMA Jewels' ponzi scheme 1 7 Gone in a blink Mansoor Khan, the managing director and owner of I Monetary Advisory, duped lakhs of investors in a ponzi scheme in Bengaluru. An audio clip in which he claims he will commit suicide began circulating on Sunday. The IMA office was closed from June 5 - June 9 on account of Eid and on Sunday after the officials received the audio clip, decided to keep it shut on Monday too and alerted the employees not to open on Monday. With the office staying shut and rumours flying that he has fled to UAE, investors panicked and demanded their money back. Photo by Kaushik JN/MMCL Mansoor Khan speaks Owner of IMA, Mansoor Khan, later issued another clip assuring the people that he would return and repay everybody’s money by the 15th , but didn't say which month. He also said he is still in Bengaluru and has not fled with anyone’s hard-earned money. Photo by Kaushik JN/MMCL Last resort A huge group of investors, including women and aged people, started marching from Shivajinagar towards the city police commissioner’s office with placards in their hands on Tuesday. The protest rally began at 1:45 pm and the group reached the city commissioner’s office around 2:15 pm. Photo by Kaushik JN/MMCL Cops to the rescue The Home Minister called for an emergency meeting which was attended by city police commissioner T Suneel Kumar, Crime commissioner Alok Kumar. Meanwhile, 40 police personnel started taking complaints from 9 am on Tuesday and had eight separate counters just to lodge I Monetary Advisory related complaints. Photo by Kaushik JN/MMCL Over 7,500 complaints registered The Commercial Street police station registered over 7,500 complaints. Scared, restless investors continued to visit the police station till 2 am. The complaint desk was later shifted to AS Convention Centre near Shivajinagar. Photo by Kaushik JN/MMCL Special Investigation Team appointed Eleven members were put on board to investigate the fraud and to find the remaining six board of directors who are equally guilty of being a part of this scam. Photo by Kaushik JN/MMCL Communication gap Red flags had been raised about I Monetary Advisory way back in November last year but thousands of investors, mostly from the Muslim community, failed to get the picture as notices could not be published in Urdu newspapers. Bangalore North Sub Division Assistant Commissioner LC Nagaraj published a public notice on November 16, 2018 in a leading English daily and a vernacular one, but not in the language newspaper they are familiar with. “I wanted the public notice about IMA defaulting in repayment of the depositors’ money to be published in an Urdu daily,” said Nagaraj. “But Daily Salar management refused to publish the public notice due to the reasons best known to them. I suspect the board of directors of IMA had something to do with it,” he added. Daily Salar’s advertisement manager Tajuddin told Mirror, “We could not publish the public notice since we received it late. Our deadline to receive advertisements is 7 pm.” The public notice published on November 16, 2018 stated that M/s I Monetary Advisory Private Limited and its associates had committed an offence by illegally collecting the money from the public and diverting the said funds to its Directors’ self-interest thereby committing default in repayment of the depositors’ money. Photo by Kaushik JN/MMCL

Bengaluru

Urdu paper refused to publish notice cautioning investors; ad in English, Kannada dailies didn’t helpRed flags had been raised aboutway back in November last year but thousands of investors, mostly from the Muslim community, failed to get the picture as notices could not be published in Urdu newspapers.North Sub Division Assistant Commissioner LC Nagaraj published a public notice on November 16, 2018 in a leading English daily and a vernacular one, but not in the language newspaper they are familiar with.“I wanted the public notice about IMA defaulting in repayment of the depositors’ money to be published in an Urdu daily,” said Nagaraj.“But Daily Salar management refused to publish the public notice due to the reasons best known to them. I suspect the board of directors of IMA had something to do with it,” he added.Nagaraj was baffled that there was no complaint from any investor even after publishing the public notice in the English and vernacular daily. “We had published the public notice against Ambidant Marketing on the same day. We received 7,000 complaints from investors,” he said.Daily Salar’s GM, Syed Usman, said he was not aware of the public notice or the refusal to publish the notice. He directed Bangalore Mirror to the advertisement manager Tajuddin who said: “We could not publish the public notice since we received it late. Our deadline to receive advertisements is 7 pm.”The public notice published on November 16, 2018 stated that M/s I Monetary Advisory Private Limited and its associates had committed an offence by illegally collecting the money from the public and diverting the said funds to its Directors’ self-interest thereby committing default in repayment of the depositors’ money.It has also stated that the Government, exercising its power under Section 5 of Karnataka Protection of Interest of Depositors in Financial Establishments Act, 2004 has appointed Assistant Commissioner,North Sub-Division as the competent authority to forfeit movable and immovable properties of IMA.If only the gullible investors had read the writing on the wall.An 11-member SIT team was constituted to investigate the IMA fraud. BR Ravikanthe Gowda, DIG (Fire Force) will head it and DCP (CCB), S Girish, will be part of the team.Six directors of IMA, Nasir Hussain, Naveed Ahmed Nattamkar, Nizammuddin Azeemuddin, Afshan Tabassum, Afsar Pasha and Arshad Khan surrendered on Tuesday.
