Voda Idea, Airtel turn to Samsung for 4G/5G tech

NEW DELHI: Vodafone Idea and Bharti Airtel have initiated separate “exploratory talks” with South Korea’s Samsung to source equipment for their 4G networks and future 5G deployments, even as uncertainty looms over the future of Huawei in India, after a US ban on the Chinese vendor.Both Bharti Airtel and Vodafone India don't want to get stuck with just two vendors — Ericsson and Nokia — in case of a ban on Huawei, as there could be demand and supply issues as well in such a scenario, a person familiar with the strategy of one of the two telecom companies said."They want to keep their options open with Samsung. ZTE (also from China) is there, but the telcos wouldn’t want to go big with it … telcos want to diversify when it comes to vendors," the person said.A second person said Samsung was already getting “feelers” from telcos in India for both 4G and 5G technologies. “There are feelers on 5G. But, there are many steps required, including trials in India since commercial deployment has some time to start in the country. Even on 4G, Samsung is getting feelers from the two telcos”.Both market leader Vodafone Idea and Bharti Airtel operate in a multi-vendor environment, but the former's exposure to Chinese vendors, especially Huawei, increased lately after awarding new contracts to modernise and expand its 4G network in seven circles.Bharti Airtel uses Huawei’s 4G equipment in several circles. Samsung so far works only with Reliance Jio Infocomm in India. Bharti Airtel declined to comment, while Vodafone Idea and Samsung didn't respond to ET's queries.The Indian government has yet to take a final view on whether Huawei would be allowed to participate in 5G trials, and further in 5G commercial deployments. “There are security issues … it is not only amatter of technology where their participation in 5G is concerned,” telecom minister Ravi Shankar Prasad told media last week.The Department of Telecommunications (DoT), though, appears to be divided on the issue, given the sensitive nature of Sino-Indian diplomatic ties.A section of the department believes the country can’t depend on just two network equipment suppliers and point out that there were risks from European vendors as well. This section believes Huawei should be given an opportunity in the 5G trials, which will also allow India to scrutinise security vulnerabilities, if any. The other section, though, believes Chinese vendors are a serious security threat to India, given those companies are — under Chinese law — dutybound to share information with the government there.
