Despite bar, bathers get free run at canal

GHAZIABAD: There has been no check on people swimming in Ganga canal in Masuri, despite the Ghaziabad SSP’s recent order,On Wednesday, many children were seen jumping into the canal from a height of 15-20 feet. The spot they had chosen is from where the water flow is regulated.A visit to Masuri’s Nahal area revealed that the spot from where the children were jumping into the water is around 50 metre from Nahal Jhaal police post. But no policemen made an effort to stop them. Scores of onlookers had gathered near the edge of the canal on Wednesday to watch the children, some as young as nine-year-old, jumping into.After several cases of drowning were reported, SSP Upendra Kumar Agrawal had put a ban on revellers entering the water body two weeks ago and directed the SHOs of Muradnagar and Masuri to issue challans to people who violate the order and also seize their vehicles.Every year in summers, hundreds of people from NCR visit the spot. The number increases on weekends and on holidays.Around 30 people drown in the canal every year, as per police records. When contacted, Praveen Kumar Sharma, the SHO of Masuripolice station, said the focus was on stopping people who consume alcohol and go for a swim in the canal. He claimed that those who were taking a bath in the canal on Wednesday were “regulars” who live nearby.The SSP on Wednesday, however, said, “I neither have any power to stop someone from taking bath, nor it’s police job. We just sensitise. Police conduct patrolling and request people not to take bath.”Meanwhile, a Provincial Armed Constabulary (PAC) team has been deployed around Chota Haridwar in the Muradnagar stretch of the canal for a week in view of a an auspicious occasion wherein hundreds of devotees are paying a visit to a nearby temple and taking a dip in the canal.The SHO of Muradnagar, OP Singh, saide actions were being taken against people who were found consuming alcohol and swimming in canal. He saidt around 15 persons have been issued challans under Section 34 ofthe Police Act for endangering lives inhe past four days.
