Congress workers want Priyanka as UP CM candidate

Rae Bareli, June 13 : Congress workers from Uttar Pradesh are now demanding that the party should project Priyanka Gandhi Vadra as the partys chief ministerial candidate for the 2022 Uttar Pradesh Assembly polls.

While party leaders, who held day-long deliberations with the Congress General Secretary in-charge of eastern part of the state, said that the party's revival was sure if Gandhi was projected as Chief Minister in 2022.

Talking to reporters after the thanksgiving dinner hosted by UPA chairperson Sonia Gandhi in Rae Bareli on Wednesday night, former Varanasi MP Rajesh Misra said: "We are requesting Priyanka Gandhi to strengthen the party for the upcoming bypolls and state elections. We have also conveyed to her that she should become the chief ministerial face to challenge the Bhartiya Janata Party (BJP)."

"Most of us believe that the main reason behind Congress's drubbing is weak organisation in most constituencies. The same was also conveyed in the meeting. We have decided to work harder and strengthen our party at the booth level across Uttar Pradesh.

"If Priyanka Gandhi starts a door to door campaign then we will definitely form the next government in the state," he added.

Congress candidate from Fatehpur constituency and former MP, Rakesh Sachan, said: "Party workers want Priyanka Gandhi to lead Congress in the Assembly polls. We have lost the elections because the BJP was able to successfully polarise the elections."

Former BJP MP Savitri Bai Phule who had lost on a Congress ticket from Bahraich, meanwhile, said: "We have lost the polls because the Lok Sabha elections did not happen through ballot paper system.

"The BJP has muzzled the democracy and irregularities in EVM were witnessed everywhere. I will request the leadership to start a nationwide movement demanding future polls be held through ballot paper."

Meanwhile, Sonia Gandhi's dinner at the Bhuemau guest house was attended by local leaders and booth level workers. She thanked them for contributing to her victory for the fourth consecutive term from Rae Bareli.

Priyanka, meanwhile, urged Congress leaders to be prepared for the struggle ahead and said: "Apna maan bana lijiye...kaam karna hai, dil se karna hai toh sangharsh karna padega..(make up your mind, we have to work.. work with your heart and take up the struggle)."

She also said she will return to review the poll performance and would sit with individual leaders to take detailed feedback.

She also pulled up party workers in Rae Bareli and cautioned them: "Yeh chunav Sonia Gandhi ne aur janta ne jitaya hai. Sachai yeh hai keh aap sab mein se jis ne dil se kaam kiya hai uski jaankari aap ko hai aur kisne nahi kiya hai uski jaankari main karungi (The truth is that this election has been won by Sonia Gandi and the people of Rae Bareli. Those who have worked for the party know this in their hearts and I will find out all those who have not)."
