'If alcohol found in your jurisdiction, no police station postings for you for 10 years', Bihar CM warns cops

Bihar CM Nitish Kumar looking at the poster painting exhibition at Adhiveshan Bhawan in Patna in 2015 on the occasion of Alcohol Prohibition Day (File Photo) | Photo Credit: BCCL

Patna: Often criticised for his stringent 'alcohol prohibition' policy which critics claim has only been implemented on paper, Bihar Chief Minister Nitish Kumar on Wednesday directed police stations across the state to give the state government their word, in writing, that no illegal liquor trade is taking place in their jurisdiction.

In addition, the Chief Minister and Janata Dal (United) supremo also warned police personnel that if alcohol is recovered from places that fall within their jurisdiction/area, they will not be given postings in police stations for the next ten years. This stringent measure is expected to make a major dent in the illegal alcohol business which has been thriving in Bihar since the imposition of the liquor ban by the state government in 2016.

Bihar CM yesterday gave directions to police to take in writing from each police station that illegal alcohol trade isn't taking place in their area. If alcohol is recovered from the area after that, the police personnel won't be given postings in police stations for next 10 yrs pic.twitter.com/HT7FqPV9HM — ANI (@ANI) June 13, 2019

Despite stringent measures by the state government to thwart the operations of the illegal liquor mafia in Bihar, multiple reports showing the trade flourishing even under prohibition have emerged over the past couple of years. In October of last year, as many as 400 police officials in the state were sacked for violating the liquor ban. Properties owned by the erring officers were also confiscated by the Economic Offences Unit of the Bihar Police.

For this purpose, the state also approved the deployment of 20 specially-trained canines as part of India's first dog squad dedicated to the detection of liquor consignments. Made to undergo special training at the Integrated Intelligence Training Academy in Hyderabad, the dogs were trained for over nine months before being inducted into the Bihar Police.

At the time of its implementation, the Prohibition Bill in Bihar was called 'draconian', prompting the state legislature to water down some of the strict punishments listed under the Bihar Prohibition and Excise Act. As a result, the state government declared that first-time offenders will not be mandatorily sent to prison but will have to pay a penalty of Rs 50,000. Before this amendment in July of 2018, even first-time offenders in Bihar were looking at prosecution under non-bailable offences.

The Chief Minister himself while addressing the monsoon session of the state Assembly last year said, "Now the house, where liquor was recovered, will not be seized and mass penalty provision has also been removed."
