Cyclone Vayu spares Gujarat: In 1998, a cyclone rained death, killed thousands in state

Unlike 1998, when Gujarat government ignored warnings and failed to evacuate people, this time nearly 3 lakh people have been moved to safety. (Photo: Reuters)

For thousands who lived in and around the bustling coastal town of Kandla in Gujarat, June 9, 1998 started as an ordinary day. But by mid-morning, some were perplexed to see the sky suddenly turn dark and strong winds howl around. June typically is a month characterised by a spotless sky in this part of the world, known for its vast treeless salt pans.

In the next six hours, it did not just rain in Kandla but literally poured. Soon the floodwaters surged vast areas inhabited by salt and port workers. As water levels rose, people shifted to higher spots.

Jayanthibhai, a salt worker, was one of them. He, his family and 28 others climbed on to the roof of his two-storey house with a hope to escape the fury of the floodwaters. By then, tides as high as 25 feet were slapping the town.

One such tide slammed into his house and the building came down like a crumbling block. Jayanthibhai escaped. He held on to a pillar but was shattered to see his wife, two daughters and others swept away. "It was worse than the curse of Durvasa [a mythical sage who pronounced calamitous curses]," a 1998 report in India Today magazine quotes Jayanthibhai as saying.

Elsewhere in Kandla, the picture of death and destruction was no different. The town was full of dead bodies and the stench was nauseating.

The exact number of deaths remains unknown as several people were washed into the sea during the 1998 Gujarat cyclone. (Photo: India Today archives)

Every now and then loaded trucks were dumping bodies at hospitals which had to turn their lobbies and waiting halls into temporary mortuaries. Outside, mass pyres were being lit around the town to handle countless decaying bodies.

ALSO READ | How port town of Kandla was destroyed in 1998 Gujarat cyclone

At the Kandla port, 15 ships reportedly sank. Such was the scale of destruction that violent waves and strong winds scooped two ships and tossed them onto National Highway 8A.

Not just Kandla, but even towns like Jamnagar, Junagadh and Rajkot bore a similar picture of misery and helplessness. The exact number of houses collapsed, shanties washed away, vehicles swept and other infrastructure destroyed remains unknown.

A view of the destruction in Kandala, Gujarat, after the 1998 cyclone. (Photo: India Today archives)

When this happened on June 9, the BJP-led state government, despite advance warnings, was sleeping peacefully. It chose to do nothing and the people were totally unaware of what was heading their way. They were left to fend for themselves when it started raining cats and dogs, and the maddening sea rushed towards them.

At the Kandla port, 15 ships reportedly sank. Violent waves and strong winds scooped two ships and tossed them onto National Highway 8A.

Since June 4, 1998 the India Meteorological Department (IMD) had been monitoring the cyclone over the Arabian Sea. At 12:30 pm on June 7, the IMD issued a warning, specifically for the Saurashtra and Kutch coastline, which includes Kandla, saying a very severe cyclone was approaching Gujarat.

Next morning, the IMD issued another danger signal, this time for Kandla port. But the government remained unconcerned and indifferent. Help arrived when thousands had died -- thousands who could have been easily evacuated and saved.

Path of the 1998 Gujarat cyclone and details of warnings given. (Source: India Today archives)

Unlike today, 1998 was an era when television had limited reach and news channels barely existed. The common people had literally no clue about the approaching cyclone and its destructive potential.

Official figures put the death toll as 1,173 and 1,774 people missing. But media reports, eyewitness and volunteer accounts from 1998 suggest that this was grossly an understatement of the ground reality. India Today magazine's reports from 1998 say at least 4,000 people had died and countless went missing as bodies were washed to the sea.

Government estimate of destruction for Kandla alone was Rs 18,55,38,00,000 (Rs 1,855.33 crore).

After the devastation, the then BJP government came up with a baffling defence to justify its inaction. "The land the victims were living on belonged to the Kandla Port Trust and its authorities should have issued the warnings," state Industry Minister and former Chief Minister Suresh Mehta told India Today magazine after the storm in 1998. "The Government took adequate measures within its own limits, wherever it had been warned," he had explained.

Such was the callousness that within a month of the tragedy, the Keshubhai Patel government, that was begging for central grants and help from NGOs, ordered new Cielo cars for its 30 ministers.

WATCH: REBUILDING KANDLA AFTER 1998 DEADLY CYCLONE

Grounds reports from Kandla from 1998 suggest that volunteers, including those of the Rashtriya Swayamsevak Sangh and the Vishwa Hindu Parishad, did a far better job in helping people than the powerful state machinery.

CYCLONE VAYU: 21 YRS ON, GUJARAT BREATHS A SIGH OF RELIEF

It is in this context that on Thursday morning people breathed a sigh of relief in Gujarat when IMD announced that Cyclone Vayu, a very severe cyclonic storm, has changed its course and will no longer make landfall in the state.

In its latest updates on Cyclone Vayu, IMD said the cyclone changed its course overnight on June 12 and has skirted off the Saurashtra coast in Gujarat. Initially, Cyclone Vayu was expected to make a landfall on the Gujarat coast on June 13 as a very severe cyclone.

This is welcome news for Gujarat because had Cyclone Vayu continued moving on its earlier path, it would have been the first major cyclone to hit Gujarat in 21 years after the 1998 Gujarat cyclone.

The 1998 Gujarat cyclone generated maximum windspeed of 160 kmph (90 knots). But at the time of landfall, this had come down to 148.16 kmph. In comparison to this, Cyclone Vayu is expected to have maximum windspeed of 135-145 kmph. At its strongest point, Cyclone Vayu may generate windspeed of 160 kmph.

GUJARAT: LONGEST COASTLINE BUT NOT MANY CYCLONES

Gujarat is the state with longest coastline in India but major cyclones rarely hit it. This is largely because it falls on the west coast hugging the Arabian Sea.

India experiences cyclones from two sources: the Arabian Sea basin and the Bay of Bengal basin. Of these, most cyclones are generated over the Bay of Bengal because its conditions are more suitable for cyclones.

48.5% of all cyclones generated over the Arabian Sea dissipate over the sea itself and do not reach land.

The primary reason is that the surface temperature of Bay of Bengal is more than that of the Arabian Sea. Tropical cyclones generally need a temperature of around 28 degrees Celsius, a condition easily met by the Bay of Bengal, unlike the Arabian Sea. (Read more on this and other aspects here.)

Cyclones in Arabian Sea (left) versus cyclones in Bay of Bengal (right). (Source: India Meteorological Department)

India Meteorological Department reports show that 48.5 per cent of all cyclones generated over the Arabian Sea dissipate over the sea itself and do not reach land.

On the west coast, Gujarat is the most prone for the cyclones developing over the Arabian Sea. It is estimated that nearly 23 per cent of the cyclones developing over Arabian Sea cross Gujarat coast and 11 per cent each cross Pakistan and Oman coasts.

IMD data on cyclones for the past 126 years (1891-2017), show that India was hit by 305 cyclones that were classified as severe and above. Of these, 75 per cent (i.e. 229) were generated over the Bay of Bengal basin and the rest over the Arabian Sea.

On the west coast, Gujarat is the most prone for the cyclones developing over the Arabian Sea. Nearly 23 per cent of the cyclones developing over Arabian Sea cross Gujarat coast.

If we break down the data for a state-wise analysis, we find that Gujarat has weathered only 11 cyclones that were classified as severe and above in these 126 years. Other west coast states -- Kerala, Karnataka, Maharashtra/Goa -- witnessed fewer cyclones between 1891 and 2017. Kerala: 1, Karnataka: 0 and Maharashtra/Goa: 4.

(Hover/click on the colours for state-wise data)

In comparison to this, states on the east coast (Tamil Nadu, Andhra Pradesh, Odisha and West Bengal) collectively weathered 106 such cyclones. West Bengal: 23, Odisha: 22, Tamil Nadu: 30 and Andhra Pradesh: 31.

HAS GUJARAT CHANGED SINCE 1998?

The 1998 Gujarat cyclone was a wake-up call for the state government. The scale of death and destruction was unprecedented. The state government was unprepared to tackle devastation of this scale and nature. This was largely because cyclone-related destruction in India is generally associated with states like Odisha, West Bengal, Andhra Pradesh and Tamil Nadu on the east coast.

Having learnt its lessons the hard way in 1998, the state today has its own detailed Cyclone Preparedness and Response Plan. In contrast to 1998 when the state government did not act on IMD warnings, resulting in thousands of deaths, the plan stipulates that state authorities should gear up emergency operations soon after the first warning is released by the IMD about an approaching cyclone.

This time the Gujarat government heeded to IMD's warnings and evacuated close to 3 lakh people. Major airports in the state have been temporarily closed and the Indian Railways too has suspended services in the affected region.

The Army, Coast Guard, Indian Navy, National Disaster Relief Force and local authorities have all been alerted and put on standby for post-disaster relief and rescue operations.

With Cyclone Vayu sparing the Gujarat coast, the state will still receive heavy rain and weather strong winds. But the scale of destruction, as recently seen in Odisha that braved Cyclone Fani, will be minimal at worst.

And that is something to cheer about.

The author tweets at @mukeshrawat705 and can also be reached out on Facebook.

ALSO READ | 20 years before Cyclone Fani, Super Cyclone killed 10,000 in Odisha

ALSO READ | Explained: What makes Cyclone Fani unique, all you need to know about deadliest cyclones in India

ALSO READ | How are cyclones named?

ALSO WATCH | Cyclone Vayu intensifies into very severe cyclonic storm, alert in Gujarat, Diu
