#MeToo: Cops Give Nana Patekar A Clean Chit, Tanushree Says “Not Surprised”

In 2018, Tanushree Dutta stood up and spoke out against the harassment meted out to her in Bollywood--and with that, the #MeToo movement came to India. The former actress, who accused veteran actor Nana Patekar of sexually harassing her on a film set a decade ago, spoke up about how she was traumatised by the incident. Many other harrowing tales of sexual harassment and assault soon emerged from the film industry, this, being the much-needed fire starter of change. Post this, Patekar reverted by slamming a legal notice on Dutta, denying the allegations and threatening to initiate criminal defamation proceedings against her, should she not withdraw her statement of accusation.

In an unexpected twist of plot, Nana has now been given a clean chit against all claims and allegations. After eight months of heated proceedings, the infamous sexual harassment case has been closed and according to reports in Times Now, it was declared that there was “ no prima facie case against the actor.” To put it simply, there was a lack of evidence, which obviously means, the accused, Nana, will be acquitted.

Post this, Tanushree was asked about her feelings on the same, and the actress shared her opinion with the media. She said, “I'm neither shocked nor surprised being a woman in India, this is something we all have got used to. I mean if rape accused Alok Nath got a clean chit and returned to movies then surely it was not going to be difficult for harassment accused Nana Patekar to get himself or shall we say buy himself a clean chit to continue to bully hapless young women.” She further added: “But the proof is in the pudding and a gentle reminder to the Indian public to watch the video of my car being mercilessly attacked and broken while I and my family tried to escape from these monsters on ‘Horn OK Please’ set 10 years ago. After this, if you still decide to watch their movies and support then it's your bad karma. You are a corrupt people with no justice but Gods justice will rain on you someday hopefully and will avenge for all the humiliation, insult, harassment, judgement and trauma I have had to endure in the last 10+ years because of this attitude (sic).”

Still holding onto hope, she said, “A life without hope is like a candle without fire. I pray that I never have to deal with this kind of toxicity ever again in life. I’m tired of fighting alone against oppressors, bullies and a corrupt system. I have better things to do in life with my talent and skill set and I need to focus on those but please don't take this example to mean that you will not be heard when u speak up!! Continue to expose these creeps through social media and other platforms so that in future people would think twice before troubling an innocent young girl. I still believe btw that I will get justice and victory will be mine!! How..only time will tell.”

Tanushree’s lawyer, Nitin Satpute, too, shared his views. He said: "The police acted negligently to protect Nana Patekar, statements of many witnesses have not been recorded yet. The police have not investigated the case properly so we are opposing summary reports and also going to file a writ petition before the Bombay High Court.”




