Mamata threatens docs, says people paying for backing BJP

West Bengal CM writes to Senior Doctors/Professors of Medical Colleges & Hospitals, states, "Please take care of al… https://t.co/qdTugB9eO2 — ANI (@ANI) 1560423881000

KOLKATA: West Bengal CM Mamata Banerjee on Thursday warned the state's agitating doctors to "get back to work in four hours" failing which, she said, the government would act against them, which include eviction from hostels.This was not the response the doctors were hoping for. And the response from the medical fraternity was swift, ending in a further hardening of stance and a domino effect across medical college and hospital campuses. NRS Medical College and Hospital principal Saibal Mukherjee and medical superintendent-cum-vice-principal Saurabh Chattopadhyay resigned, citing their failure to "overcome the prevailing crisis."NRS has been the epicentre of the crisis as well as its origin, where the murderous assault on two young interns on Monday set in motion the sequence of events. Twenty-one senior doctors at the College of Medicine and Sagore Dutta Hospital in Kamarhati, too, expressed their desire to resign.The striking junior doctors viewed the CM's comments as a threat, defied the deadline to join work and vowed to continue their stir till their demands for "security and justice" were met.A similar threat came from the Kolkata Municipal Corporation's pool of 300 doctors. "Aren't you ashamed?" Mamata had asked agitators during a visit to SSKM Hospital. "I condemn people who shout like this in hospitals. These are outsiders. These outsiders are coming and creating trouble here, attacking people... I urge you to restore normalcy in the next four hours. No one (outsiders) will stay in the hospital premises other than patients. Vacate the hostels. Those who do not work have no right to stay in hostels," she shouted, daring protesters to bring their political leaders: "I do not fear protests. I was born out of protests.""All of you have voted for the BJP this time. Now you understand who you have voted for," Banerjee added, in a reference to the recent Lok Sabha poll where the BJP got more than 40% of the popular vote (a little less than the Trinamool's 43%-plus share)."There is an attempt to create a communal divide but there can be no Hindu-Muslim divide among doctors. The junior doctors who are protesting are outsiders," she said.
