In nationwide call, doctors put OPDs and surgeries on hold

(This story originally appeared in on Jun 14, 2019)

NEW DELHI : Union health minister Harsh Vardhan on Thursday expressed concern at the recent incidents of violence against doctors. He said he will take up the matter with the chief ministers so that such incidents are avoided in future. His statement comes in the wake of the assault on a junior doctor in Kolkata and a call by doctors for shutdown of medical services nationwide.In Delhi, doctors have called for a complete shutdown of OPD and routine surgeries on Friday. Only emergency services will be allowed, said Dr Girish Tyagi, president of Delhi Medical Association (DMA), which has 18,000 doctors as members in the state. He added that a central act prescribing strong punishment for perpetrators of violence against doctors is the need of the hour. OPDs at AIIMS and Safdarjung Hospital , where over 10,000 patients come daily, will remain shut too. The resident doctors of both hospitals have called for a boycott of routine medical services. AIIMS Patna and Raipur have also extended their support to the shutdown call.Dr Jawahar Singh, vice-president of AIIMS Resident Doctors' Association (RDA), said that doctors are tired of fake assurances. "There is a lot of anger among doctors. We work tirelessly for hours to save lives, but today our own lives are in danger. How can we work in such an environment? Our colleagues in Bengal are being attacked and threatened while the state looks the other way," he added.The resident doctors at the premier hospital wore black badges, bandages and helmets to work on Thursday.In a rare show of solidarity, many doctors from corporate-run hospitals have also given their support to the protest. "We are observing a black day on Friday," said Dr Aparna Jaswal, senior cardiologist at Fortis Escorts Heart Institute.Dr Sujoy Shad from Sir Ganga Ram hospital (SGRH) said, "The doctor who was assaulted at NRS Hospital in West Bengal is still critical. This is intolerable. We will not let our anger die down until the government takes concrete measures to ensure justice and steps to prevent similar incidents in future.""The perpetrators of such attacks should be barred from seeking treatment at the hospital where the incident occurred. We should have a no-treatment list on the lines of no-fly list for abusive patients or their attendants," said Dr Shad.In a communique to all its state presidents and secretaries, Indian Medical Association (IMA) has asked them to organise demonstrations in front of the offices of district collectors from 10am to noon on Friday and hand over a memorandum addressed to the Prime Minister. All local branches and individual members of IMA will send an appeal to the PM and home minister demanding a central Act on violence against doctors and hospitals.
