Global meeting must act to rescue Indian Ocean yellowfin tuna from collapse

Posted on 14 June 2019

Gland, Switzerland: In advance of the 23rd annual meeting of the Indian Ocean Tuna Commission (IOTC) next week, WWF warns that ongoing overfishing could push yellowfin tuna populations in the Indian Ocean to the brink of collapse. WWF urges all member states to make strong, clear and public commitments to reduce overfishing when they meet in Hyderabad, India from 17-21 June.

Of the 4.8 million tonnes of major commercial tuna caught globally, 28 per cent is yellowfin tuna, second only to skipjack tuna. Yellowfin comprises a large portion of the annual tuna catch in the Indian Ocean, around 42 per cent (average catches 2013-2017). The average annual catches have increased and remain above maximum sustainable yield limits, and are subject to being overexploited and overfished since 2014 when the IOTC scientific committee conducted the stock assessment for the yellowfin tuna.

Yellowfin tuna forms a critical component of European consumption in the United Kingdom, France and Spain, among others.

The yellowfin tuna catches have increased by an overall three per cent (12,000 tonnes) from the 2014 baseline levels.

The IOTC needs to adopt a robust conservation and management measure that effectively allows a yellowfin tuna rebuilding plan via a strengthened data collection mechanism in place, recognizing that as per the IOTC scientific advice, an overall 25-40 per cent reduction is required for the stocks to recover (with a 50 per cent probability).

Marcel Kroese, WWF’s Global Tuna Leader, said, “Urgent action is essential, otherwise the Indian Ocean yellowfin tuna population will ultimately collapse.”“Allowing the yellowfin tuna population to crash would not only harm ocean ecosystems, it would undermine the livelihoods of countless fishers and their families, and damage local economies.”In 2016, the IOTC adopted a rebuilding measure aiming to achieve a 20 per cent reduction in yellowfin tuna catches but member states have fallen well short of this target, missing the mark by a total of 23,000 tonnes of fish.Umair Shahid, WWF’s Indian Ocean Tuna Manager, said, “Each member state must be held accountable for these repeated failures to act.”“Every country that catches yellowfin tuna must come to this meeting with a clear commitment to reduce its catches, which it should reveal to the public. All IOTC members owe this commitment to responsible conduct to their own communities as well as to consumers who want to make the right choice.”WWF’s top priority for the meeting is to ensure action toward the urgent rebuilding of Indian Ocean yellowfin tuna populations. WWF is also calling for parties to commit to a comprehensive fish aggregation device (FAD) management plan; improved observer coverage effectively to 100 per cent with human or electronic means; monitoring of small-scale fisheries; and the reduction of bycatch including of sharks and rays, cetaceans and turtles.- ENDS -(Media): Rucha Naware | WWF International | rnaware@wwfint.org ; +32465751339(Technical): Umair Shahid | Indian Ocean Tuna Manager | WWF-Mozambique | +92 307 212 6393WWF is one of the world’s largest and most respected independent conservation organizations, with over 5 million supporters and a global network active in over 100 countries. WWF's mission is to stop the degradation of the Earth's natural environment and to build a future in which humans live in harmony with nature, by conserving the world's biological diversity, ensuring that the use of renewable natural resources is sustainable, and promoting the reduction of pollution and wasteful consumption. Visit www.panda.org/news for latest news and media resources and follow us on Twitter @WWF_media.
