News Digest: A sharp, speedy recap of the day's headlines

Mumbai: Have you missed any news today? Here are the top national, international headlines of the day.

Water crisis in Tamil Nadu: Tamil Nadu is reeling under acute water crisis for the past several months after Chennai's Porur Lake, which is considered one of the main sources of water, has reached its lowest level. Moreover, with the mercury soaring in the region, there seems to be no respite for perturbed locals in Chennai.

Read: Water crisis deepens in TN, soaring temperatures adds to woes

Doctor's soften stance: Agitating junior doctors in West Bengal softened their stand on Sunday and asserted that Chief Minister Mamata Banerjee was free to decide the venue of the meeting with them, but stressed that it should be held in open.

Read: Protesting docs say CM free to choose venue, but meeting should be in open

Pakistan and terror: Pakistan has failed to complete 25 of the 27 action points given by the international terror financing watchdog FATF to check funding to terrorist groups such as LeT and JeM and frontal groups like Jamat-ud-Dawah and Falah-e-Insaniat Foundation.

Read: Pakistan fails to fulfil 25 of 27 action points given by terror finance watchdog

India plays down China's Belt Road Initiative: India maintained its skeptical stand by not endorsing Belt and Road Initiative of China when the matter came up for discussion before the Shanghai Cooperation Organisation in Bishkek.

Read: India plays down China's Belt and Road Initiative at SCO

Shiv Sena vs AIMIM: Ruckus created by the corporators of All India Majlis-e-Ittehadul Muslimeen in Aurangabad Municipal Corporation will be dealt in a similar fashion as Pakistan was dealt by India after terror attacks, read Shiv Sena’s mouthpiece Saamna on Saturday.

Read: Referring to Balakot strike, Sena warns AIMIM for ruckus in Aurangabad

State vs Centre: Over the row of political violence and doctors' strike in West Bengal, the TMC in the meeting convened by Prime Minister Narendra Modi on Sunday, said, State governments should be allowed to carry out their duties without any intervention from the Centre.

Read: Allow state governments to function smoothly: TMC's Derek O'Brien to Centre

Bihar battles encephalitis: As deaths due to encephalitis in Muzaffarpur mounted to 93 on Sunday, people created ruckus at a government-run hospital here while Union Health Minister Dr Harsh Vardhan was visiting to take stock of the situation.

Read: Bihar: Encephalitis kills 93, public creates ruckus as Harsh Vardhan visits

PM calls for cooperation: A day ahead of the beginning of the Budget session of Parliament in which crucial Bills are likely to be tabled, Prime Minister Narendra Modi urged all leaders to keep political differences aside and not to disrupt the functioning of the Parliament.

Read: Keep political differences aside for smooth functioning of Parliament: PM
