Top news of the day: Protesting doctors seek Mamata Banerjee’s apology, Southern Railway withdraws ‘Hindi/English only’ circular, and more

Doctors across India are observing a nationwide protest to condemn the violence against their peers in West Bengal. The Indian Medical Association has called for a strike on June 17 with withdrawal of non-essential health services. | Those living in Bengal will have to learn to speak in Bengali: Mamata Banerjee

After successfully handling the campaign for Andhra Pradesh Chief Minister Y.S. Jagan Mohan Reddy, the Prashant Kishor-mentored Indian Political Action Committee (IPAC) is finding many takers, including Tamil Nadu Chief Minister and AIADMK leader Edappadi K. Palaniswami.

In the revised circular issued on June 14, the Principal Chief Operations Manager S. Anantharaman said senior officials should ensure that the communication between Control Room and Station Masters should be clearly understood without any ambiguity.

The Aam Aadmi Party government in Delhi has recently announced its decision to allow free rides to women passengers on buses and Metro trains. With the Delhi Metro Rail Corporation being an equal partnership between the Delhi government and the Centre, Mr. Sreedharan, currently a principal advisor to the DMRC, said that the Prime Minister’s “personal intervention” was required in the matter.

Independent MLAs — R. Shankar (Ranebennur) and H. Nagesh (Mulbagal) — have been made Ministers.

The move will hurt American exporters of these 29 items as they have to pay duties on these products. India would get about $217 million additional revenue from such imports.

The CBI informed the Bombay High Court that an operation will be carried out within a month to search and retrieve four country-made pistols, which were allegedly dismantled and thrown by the accused into a creek in Thane district.

The case relates to the alleged terror-funding in the Valley and involves Jama’at-ud-Da’wah (JuD) chief Hafiz Saeed, the 2008 Mumbai terror attack mastermind based in Pakistan.

Ms. Sanders, who has worked with Trump since the early days of his unconventional run for office and became a national public figure in her own right, is the latest in a long line of senior advisers to leave the White House.

The Indian off-spinner laughed about the incident, which happened 16 years back at Centurion, but admitted that it got so ugly at that time that it required intervention from legendary Wasim Akram, Rahul Dravid and Javagal Srinath to separate them.

“My training was disturbed a lot initially. I’ve already told everyone how much stress my sister gave me. I couldn’t train properly at least for 10-15 days after that. But now, I’m starting to forget everything and getting back to my training,” said Dutee who won two silver medals at the 2018 Asian Games.

“India supported our bid but the venues will be decided later. Our preference is to have the matches in Pakistan if the Indian government gives permission to the Indian board to send its team to Pakistan for the tournament. If not, UAE is the second option,” Mani told the media in Lahore.
