Tujhse Hai Raabta June 14, 2019 Written Update: Sampada gets Moksh's custody

The episode starts with Malhar taking rounds of the fire while beating up Atharva's men. Atharva is explaining his plan to Anupriya that he did everything on purpose so Malhar marries Kalyani. Sampada also joins in saying that she was an equal part in the plan. Pallavi says that Malhar put Sindoor first and now took the rounds which means he married her. Kalyani gains consciousness. Just then a car comes to the venue and a judge steps out. Pallavi identifies him as the judge who is dealing with Moksh's custody. Kalyani asks Malhar why he married her. Atharva walks in and tells the judge about what has been happening there. Kalyani tells the judge that she never wanted to marry Atharva and she agreed to the marriage due to his threats. Anupriya tells them that Atharva had abducted her. Aao Saheb tells that she can prove that Anupriya was in Banaras and was not abducted.

She calls someone and asks him when Anupriya left the hotel in Banaras. The person confirms that Anupriya left the hotel the previous day. Anupriya says that Aao Saheb has stooped so low that she is supporting Atharva. Atul warns her for the way she talks to Aao Saheb. Sarthak warns Atul of speaking harshly with Anupriya. Sampada asks the judge to take a decision blaming Malhar that he married Kalyani. She says that agreeing to stay with Malhar for the sake of Moksh was her biggest mistake. She asks Malhar why he had to marry Kalyani when he had come only to rescue Anupriya. He is speechless. Just then Aao Saheb receives a message which she shows to the judge. It's the proof of Anupriya staying at the hotel in Banaras.

Sarthak tries to convince the judge that they all are lying. Judge says that the court of law works on evidence and not in emotions and opinions. The judge gives the custody of Moksh to Sampada and tells her that she can file a divorce with Malhar. Kalyani asks Malhar why is he standing quiet and why is he not telling the judge that he doesn't agree to his decision. She goes and picks up Moksh and gives him to Malhar. She asks the judge is she is not able to see the love in the eyes of the father for Moksh. The judge warns Kalyani that they could be arrested for not adhering to the court's decision. Kalyani says she is okay getting arrested as the decision ruled out is no less than a punishment. She tells the judge that she does not agree with the decision. She says that no one can separate Moksh from Malhar while she is alive. Just then Malhar says that he agrees to the decision and everyone is shocked. He says that Moksh is getting troubled because of what Sampada, Atharva and Aao Saheb are doing. He hands over Moksh to Sampada. Moksh starts to cry. Sampada tries to console Moksh.

Kalyani tells the judge that he has committed a crime by separating a father with his son. Kalyani is crying in her room and Anupriya tries to encourage her to not give up hope. Just then Atul walks in anger and tells Kalyani that today she proved to be Madhuri's daughter. Anupriya tells him not to blame Madhuri and to blame himself for all the wrong decisions. Atul tells Anupriya that the reason she is now supporting Madhuri is because she has an affair with Sarthak. Atul says that he will not divorce Anupriya and she will have to be married to him for life.
