In Bengal, learn to speak Bengali: Didi

editorial@tribune.com

Kanchrapara (WB), June 14

Chief Minister Mamata Banerjee today insisted that those living in West Bengal would have to learn to speak Bengali as she accused the BJP of targeting Bengalis and minorities to replicate the “Gujarat model” to capture power in the state.

She said she would never allow the BJP to turn West Bengal into Gujarat, the home state of PM Narendra Modi and BJP president Amit Shah, and asserted that “we will never allow Bengalis to become homeless in Bengal”.

Banerjee said, “We have to bring Bangla (language) forward. When we go to Delhi, we speak in Hindi; when we go to Punjab, we have to speak in Punjabi. I do it. When I go to Tamil Nadu, I don’t know the Tamil language, but I know a few words. So, in the same way, if you are coming to Bengal you have to speak in Bengali... We will not allow that people will come from outside and beat up Bengalis.”

The TMC supremo was addressing a rally in Kanchrapara in North 24 Paraganas district. The area is the home turf of BJP leader Mukul Roy, a friend-turned-foe of the TMC president. Roy’s son Subhrangshu is the MLA from the Bijpur constituency and has recently switched over to the BJP from the TMC.

“In Naihati, Kakinara, Barrackpore, houses of Bengalis have been ransacked. We will not tolerate this. Our party cadres didn’t ransack houses of non-Bengalis here. We are against this sort of violence,” she said.

“Just because they have won a few seats by programming EVMs doesn’t mean that you can beat up Bengalis and minorities in the state. We will not tolerate this. The police will take action against hooligans. If someone is living in Bengal, he or she has to speak in Bengali,” she said.

In the fiercely fought Lok Sabha election, the BJP won 18 Lok Sabha seats in West Bengal, only four less than the TMC’s 22.

Banerjee said, “I have nothing against non-Bengalis living in Bengal. But BJP is trying to create a Bengali and non-Bengali divide. I would urge them not to test our patience. We will never allow Bengalis to become homeless in Bengal.”

On the doctors’ strike, she reiterated her statement that some outsiders were involved in instigating the doctors and were behind the protest. Banerjee said she had seen some outsiders inside the SSKM Hospital premises raising slogans against the government. “I had rightly said yesterday that there were outsiders involved in yesterday’s incident. I had seen some outsiders raising slogans there,” Banerjee said referring to her visit to SSKM Hospital on Thursday.

Banerjee had set a 2 pm-deadline for the striking doctors to resume work on Thursday, which they defied and continued with the stir. Before ending her speech, Banerjee reiterated her slogans of “Jai Bangla” and “Jai Hind” to counter the BJP’s slogan of “Jai Shri Ram”. — PTI
