No tie-up with Congress for 2019, says Arvind Kejriwal

Delhi chief minister Arvind Kejriwal said on Saturday that he will organize a rally of Opposition parties in the national Capital. The announcement, at the United India rally in Kolkata, came a day after his Aam Aadmi Party (AAP) ruled out the possibility of an alliance with Congress in upcoming Lok Sabha polls. Will Congress be part of the meet that Kejriwal plans to host remains to be seen.

AAP leaders had been sending out signals of allying with Congress until Friday when senior party leader Gopal Rai put a lid on speculation.

"We were ready to drink poison and have an alliance with Congress to keep Modi and Amit Shah away. But now, we have decided that AAP will contest on all seats in Delhi, Punjab and Haryana with its full strength and will not have any alliance with the Congress," Rai said.

A day before, Rai had signaled that AAP was open for a pact. Even party's Rajya Sabha member, Sanjay Singh had not ruled out the possibility.

For the Congress, Sheila Dikshit, the newly-inducted head party's of Delhi unit had termed AAP "unreliable" after she assumed the charge.

She had, however, before her joining, left the ball in "high command's" court for a final decision. Her predecessor, Ajay Maken had always been opposed to the idea of an alliance. Some reports suggested that Sheila, her son and former MP of Congress, Sandeep Dikshit, and former Delhi Congress chief JP Agarwal were in favour of allying with AAP for the Lok Sabha polls later this year.

AAP leader and Greater Kailash MLA, Saurabh Bharadwaj had been dismissive terming the reports nothing more than speculations fuelled by small-time leaders from both the parties. As for Kejriwal, the AAP chief had been expressing his anti-Congress stand in all recent public and workers' meetings.

He even warned people about how voting for Congress would mean helping BJP in Delhi using arithmetic in support of his argument.

"In 2014, BJP got 46% votes, AAP 33% and Congress 15% of the vote share. With a 10 percentage point shift likely away from BJP this time, AAP is best suited to defeat it," he said.

AAP, which had been outrightly averse to an alliance with the Congress, showed some interest two months ago when Kejriwal said he would take "every measure" to stop BJP from winning in 2019.

The change in stance comes after Congress won three state assembly elections in December last. Also, a day before the results, Kejriwal attended a key meeting of the Opposition in the national capital.

Less than two weeks ago, the Kejriwal and Congress president Rahul Gandhi addressed farmers from the same stage during the Kisan Mukti march in Delhi. For the first time since AAP came to power, its leaders were invited by the Congress for the oathtaking ceremony of its CMs in MP, Rajasthan and Chhattisgarh.
