AIIMS doctors call off strike, threaten indefinite stir if demands not met by Bengal govt in 48 hours

Resident doctors at AIIMS wore bandages on their face and body as they gathered at Jawaharlal Nehru auditorium and spoke about increasing cases of violence against doctors. (Photo: ANI)

The resident doctors at AIIMS, New Delhi, called off their protest Saturday morning and said they would return to work. However, the AIIMS Association of Resident Doctors threatened to launch an indefinite stir if the West Bengal government failed to meet the demands of medical practitioners in the state within 48 hours.

“All resident doctors are back to work but we will continue with symbolic protest by wearing black badges, bandages and, helmets. If condition worsens we will go on indefinite strike from June 17,” Amrinder Singh Malhi, President, Association of Resident Doctors, AIIMS told ANI.

Follow West Bengal doctors’ protest LIVE Updates

On Friday, doctors from AIIMS, Safdarjung, Lok Nayak and GTB hospitals, along with several private hospitals in Delhi, went on strike, leaving healthcare services crippled. They were standing in solidarity with their colleagues in Bengal who were protesting the alleged assault on two medical interns at the hands of the family of a patient who died on Monday evening.

Resident doctors at @aiims_newdelhi have called off the protest and will be back to work today. The @AIIMSRDA has issued an ultimatum of 48 hours to West Bengal government to meet the demands of the docs, failing which they will go on an indefinite strike @IndianExpress — Astha Saxena (@Asthasaxena88) June 15, 2019

Resident doctors at AIIMS wore bandages on their face and body as they gathered at Jawaharlal Nehru auditorium and spoke about increasing cases of violence against doctors. “The government needs to step in and take control of the situation in West Bengal. If the situation remains the same, we will continue with the strike. We are not going to resume work till 9 am tomorrow,” Dr Malhi had said on Friday. The RDA also met the Union Health Minister requesting him to intervene.

Read | AIIMS strike: Patients from far off say caught off guard

Meanwhile, resident doctors from 14 government hospitals across Delhi will remain on strike Saturday, the Federation of Resident Doctors Association (FORDA INDIA) said.

Read | Delhi hospitals feel Bengal violence heat; doctors say strike to continue till demands met

Indian Medical Association (IMA) has also launched a three-day nationwide protest from Friday and called for a strike on June 17, Monday, with the withdrawal of non-essential health services, including OPDs.
