Bengaluru, don’t fall for fake engineering colleges

India

Bengaluru

VTU

Visvesvaraya Technological University

Karnataka

Check real vs fake



Log into AICTE website for list of recognised institutes

Department of Technical Education, Karnataka

Department of Higher Education Karnataka

VTU (through its regional office or main office)

Log into MCI or Ministry of Health and Family Welfare websites

RGUHS

Department of Medical Education

23 colleges that have been derecognised by AICTE are still offering technical courses; aspirants from outside the State are their main targetsAdmission season is set to begin. The biggest challenge for an engineering aspirant will not be which college to choose, but whether that college is a genuine one or not. As per the AllCouncil for Technical Education (AICTE), there are 23 derecognised colleges inthat are still functioning without approval.Following AICTE’s diktat, the Department of Technical Education (DTE) has sent notices to 23 colleges asking them to shut down immediately and ensure that no student is enrolled for the academic year 2019-20.In a circular, DTE director HU Talwar warned tough action against such colleges. A senior official from DTE said, “The AICTE has asked us to take necessary action against 23 colleges that were running technical courses without the council’s permission and hence we have sent notices. These blacklisted colleges don’t have the right infrastructure and faculty. A few colleges have knocked the doors of AICTE for re-approval. Hence, we want to warn students to be careful while enrolling. The students can approach us for the right information.”A senior official said that it is non-Karnataka students who are the main target for the blacklisted colleges. The colleges would also function normally and even exams would be conducted, using fakequestion papers. Only when the students reach the end of the course, they realise that they have been cheated. By then, the students would have also have paid a hefty fee (usually in the range of Rs 1 lakh plus for a year).(VTU) official said, “Despite our warning, the students fall for such colleges. In earlier cases, we had to shift the students in the middle of their academic year to another college so that their career does not get impacted. However, we are now taking a tough stance and the onus is on the student to find the right college.”Students won’t have to worry about illegal colleges in the counselling conducted by theExaminations Authority (KEA). It is computerised conselling and only the colleges recognised by the AICTE are offered to students. However, some students (both from Karnataka and outside) try to get admitted directly by contacting the college management.A senior official of the DTE said that the students can either check with the DTE or VTU for the legality of an engineering college. Medical students can check with the Department of Medical Education or Rajiv Gandhi University of Health Sciences (RGUHS).
