MoS Kishan Reddy receives death threat calls, files complaint with Hyd police

MoS Kishan Reddy receives death threat calls, files complaint with Hyd police

Kishan Reddy, who received voice Internet calls on May 20, lodged a complaint with Cyber Crime police, which registered a case and launched the investigation.

news Crime

Union Minister of State for Home G Kishan Reddy has received threatening phone calls from unknown persons, the Hyderabad Police said on Friday

Kishan Reddy, who received voice Internet calls on May 20, lodged a complaint with Cyber Crime police, which registered a case and launched the investigations.

The Bharatiya Janata Party (BJP) leader provided to police the number from which the calls were made, threatening to kill him.

Kishan Reddy, who was elected from Secunderabad Lok Sabha constituency, was inducted in Modi cabinet on May 30. He had received threatening calls in the past also.

Kishan Reddy was a three-time MLA who had won two consecutive terms from Amberpet assembly seat. However, he lost the seat in the recently-held Assembly elections in 2018 to TRS candidate Kaleru Venkatesh.

Undeterred by the defeat, Reddy contested from the Secunderabad Lok Sabha seat, which was held by his mentor Bandaru Dattatreya. He pulled off a victory against debutant Talasani Saikrishna. Reddy won with a margin of more than 62,000 votes.

Shortly after his induction, the senior leader triggered a row when he claimed that Hyderabad was a “safe zone for terrorists.”

He further threatened action against illegal immigrants from Bangladesh and Myanmar staying in Hyderabad's old city; an area largely populated by Muslims.

Meanwhile, police also registered a case against unknown persons making objectionable posts against Telangana Labour Minister Malla Reddy on the social media. The minister lodged a complaint that some unknown persons were making objectionable posts about him on Facebook and other social media platforms.

The police said they identified the IP addresses of those who were trolling him and making objectionable posts. A police officer said they were trying to trace the accused for further action.

IANS inputs
