Why was sedition chargesheet filed without approval? Delhi court slams police in JNU sedition case

The JNU sedition chargesheet has once again brought the Delhi government head-to-head with the city police. Both the sides engaged in a "blame game" on Saturday after the Patiala House Court hit out at the Delhi Police for filing a chargesheet in the sedition case against former JNUSU president Kanhaiya Kumar, former JNU students Umar Khalid and Anirban Bhattacharya among others; without procuring a required sanction from the state government.

Metropolitan Magistrate Deepak Sherawat has set deadline for the sedition case matter on February 6, and asked the Delhi Police to get required sanction approval within 10 days.

"Why did you file (the chargesheet) without any approval? Don't you have a legal department?" the court asked the Delhi Police.

Section 124-A (sedition) of the Indian Penal Code dictates that "a prior sanction from a competent authority under 196 CrPC is a must".

On January 14, police had filed the chargesheet at a city court against Kanhaiya and others, saying that Kanhaiya led a protest rally inside the university campus on February 9, 2016, and shouted anti-India slogans during the event to commemorate the hanging of Parliament-attack mastermind Afzal Guru.

Police have also charged Umar Khalid and Anirban Bhattacharya for allegedly shouting anti-India slogans during the event. As per the law, if the court decides that the case pertains to law and order, then an approval by the Centre will suffice and an approval by the state government might not be required.

However, if the court agrees that the case has 'national security implications' (as also mentioned in the chargesheet), then an approval by the state government is mandatory. The evidence listed by the agency include report of JNU's high-level committee, statement of university registrar Bhupinder Zutshi and the mobile phone recordings in which Kumar was seen arguing with him over cancellation of the programme.

Police said that a video shot by a news channel and clips shot by students present at the spot show that Khalid, Bhattacharya and Ashutosh were raising slogans.

Khalid raised slogans as shown in the videos and mobile clips, police said, citing a video which shows him saying,

"The programme is against the occupation of Kashmir by the Indian State. I'm making it very apparent that I am not from Kashmir but I believe that what is happening in Kashmir is Indian occupation of Kashmir."

A case was registered on February 11, 2016, under sections 124A and 120B of the IPC against unidentified persons at Vasant Kunj (North) police station, following complaints from BJP lawmaker Maheish Girri and Akhil Bharatiya Vidyarthi Parishad.

The event had taken place despite the university administration cancelling the permission, following a complaint from ABVP, which had termed it anti-national.
