All-India doctors' stir: Agitation to continue; patients at Delhi's GTB satisfied with emergency services

The doctors have planned to extend the strike until the government agrees to the set of demands.

New Delhi: In a massive show of solidarity on Friday, scores of doctors across the nation staged protests supporting their colleagues in West Bengal. In the national capital, a complete shutdown of elective surgeries and Out Patient Department (OPD) was witnessed. “Around 9 am we received a message from the hospital’s doctors’ association that there will be a strike today for our colleagues in Kolkata. All surgeries were immediately called off by the doctors,” said Saurabh, a junior surgeon, a first-year resident at Delhi's Guru Teg Bahadur (GTB) Hospital.

Despite complete discontinuation of services in the hospital, the relatives of the patients claimed that the doctors were helpful and due checkups in the wards were done on time, especially in the emergency cases. The on-duty emergency Chief Medical Officer at the GTB Hospital, said “No medical emergencies were turned away. Emergency trauma ward and the emergency surgery ward were operational for the patients. But we expect that the doctors' safety should not be compromised.”

Meanwhile, Saleem, a resident of Trilokpuri told MIrror Now that his wife’s intestine surgery was done on Thursday. “During the morning hours on Friday, the doctor told me that they are on strike and might not come for further check-ups but in the afternoon they came for regular checkup of my wife.”

Upon asking about demands of the doctors’ strike, Dr Lavanya, junior resident at the Radiology department said, “There have been several cases where patients attacking doctors. Doctors are saviours, every day we fight and in government hospitals where resources are extremely limited, they try their best to save patients’ lives. There should be stringent laws to deal with such attacks. No doctor deserves to be beaten.”

The doctors have planned to extend the strike until the government agrees to the set of demands. On condition of anonymity, a second-year resident at the hospital mentioned that the GTB’s doctors’ association has again called for a strike against the assault on doctors on June 15, 2019, at 8 am. But the emergency services at the hospital will continue.

She added, even on Friday, if any patient in the OPD was in a serious condition, he/she was treated in the emergency ward. Similar protests were held at the Muzzafarnagar Medical College.

Reportedly, the Indian Medical Association (IMA) had asked members of all its state branches to stage protests and wear black badges on Friday. In a communique to all its state presidents, the IMA has asked them to organise demonstrations in front of the district collectors' offices from 10 am to 12 noon on Friday.

Doctors are condemning the violence on their colleague in West Bengal, where a junior doctor was allegedly beaten by a patient’s relatives after the 82-year-old patient died on Monday.




