Floods after night-long rain throw life out of gear in Guwahati

GUWAHATI: Incessant rain since Thursday night flooded large parts of the city bringing life to a near standstill on Friday morning. Familiar sights of people wading through water completed the picture of misery in the run-up to the monsoon Prime locations along the Guwahati-Shillong Road, zoo road and stretches from Ambari to Chandmari were inundated. Denizens in flood-prone low-laying areas, including Nabin Nagar and Tarun Nagar, reeled from the impact of the waterlogging as traffic movement came to a halt. Bus service was affected till noon as key arterial routes remained under water. Pedal rickshaws were the only saviour for commuters though they charged extra than regular days."I have to bring my children home from school and was forced to wade through knee-deep water overflowing from drains. Successive governments have failed to find out a solution to artificial floods here. We have not experienced any achhe din as far as water-logging is concerned," said Ambari resident Nazneen Sultana.Reports from the district disaster management authority in Kamrup (Metropolitan) said 'partial water-logging' occurred at Anil Nagar, Nabin Nagar, Lachit Nagar, Chandmari Colony, GNB Road, Lamb Road, Hatigaon, Wireless, VIP Road, Panjabari, Sundarpur, Ganeshguri, Christian Basti, ABC and Bhangagarh areas under the Guwahati and Dispur revenue circles.The Met office said flood-threat was looming large over the state and parts of the northeast where the Southwest monsoon has made a significant advancement in the last 24 hours. The India Meteorological Department 's (IMD) Regional Meteorological Centre has warned that heavy rain is likely to occur at isolated places over Arunachal Pradesh, Assam , Meghalaya, Nagaland , Manipur, Mizoram and Tripura on Saturday. Ahead of the arrival of the monsoon season, Friday's rainfall was of convective nature, said weathermen."It was moderate rainfall measuring 13 mm on the rain gauge in Guwahati. More rain is on the cards in the northeast where the SW monsoon has covered the south and central parts of Assam along with Tripura as well as parts of Arunachal Pradesh and Nagaland on Friday," said a senior official of the IMD in Guwahati.
