Morning Digest: Probe confirms Sasikala got special treatment in jail, Trump offers concessions on immigrants in return for wall funds, and more

A select list of stories to read before you start your day

Probe confirms Sasikala got special treatment

The high-level inquiry, led by retired IAS officer Vinay Kumar, into allegations of irregularities in Bengaluru central prison has found "serious lapses" and "falsification of records" on the part of senior prison officials in extending special treatment to V.K Sasikala, who is serving a four-year sentence in a corruption case.

Trump offers concessions on immigrants in return for wall funds

U.S. President Donald Trump on Saturday offered to temporarily shield a million immigrants from deportation if Congress authorises funding for his Mexican border wall — an idea Democrats rejected, making the U.S. government shutdown likely to grind on.

Congress contests Narendra Modi’s claim on economy

Former Finance Minister P. Chidambaram on Saturday alleged that the Narendra Modi government’s claim of India achieving the highest-ever growth in the past four-and-a-half years was based on “bogus” numbers.

Mehbooba urges Rajnath to release Hurriyat leader

Peoples Democratic Party (PDP) president Mehbooba Mufti on Saturday called up Union Home Minister Rajnath Singh to raise the issue of release of senior Hurriyat leader Shahid ul Islam lodged in Tihar Jail following his arrest by the National Investigation Agency (NIA).

Forgotten in a field far away: Grave of an exiled Kashmiri king lies in ruins in Bihar

The burial ground of Yusuf Shah Chak, who ruled Kashmir from 1579 to 1586 and was one of the last native rulers of independent Kashmir, is under threat from landgrabbers.

Kashi demolitions reveal communal faultlines

The Kashi Vishwanath Temple Corridor, considered Prime Minister Narendra Modi’s pet project in his constituency, may not only alter the topography of the ancient city but also lay bare its communal faultlines.

Kohli and his remarkable journey in Tests

Virat Kohli may have his faults. He can be brash, in-your-face and ill-tempered. His methods are not for everyone. Yet, he has a priceless quality — his zeal for Tests. Kohli’s heart is in the right place.

Study reveals caste-based segregation in Bengaluru

A first-of-its-kind snapshot of the distribution of Scheduled Castes and Scheduled Tribes community in the city reveals a patchwork of caste-segregated neighbourhoods where socio-economically backward castes are ghettoised.

21 Bangladeshi nationals deported from Assam

The border police in Karimganj district of Assam on Saturday deported 21 Bangladeshis who had been detained for illegally entering India. Officials said the 21 persons, two of them women, were sent back from the Sutarkandi border checkpoint after approval from the Union Home Ministry.

Kolkata Opposition rally: EVMs become a common grouse

Several leaders of the Opposition who participated in the rally here on Saturday, raised concern on the use of electronic voting machines (EVM). At a press conference later in the day, a four-member committee was formed to look into the malfunctioning of these machines.
