Tujhse Hai Raabta written update June 14 2019: Moksh is handed over to Sampada

The episode of Tujhse Hai Raabta begins with Malhar taking pheras around the fire while beating Atharva's goons. Atharva explains his plan to Anupriya that he did everything purposely so that Malhar marries Kalyani . Sampada also joins in saying that she was also a part of the plan. Pallavi tells now that Malhar has put Sindoor and has taken pheras, he is married to Kalyani.Kalyani gains consciousness. A car comes to the venue and a judge steps out. Pallavi identifies him as the judge who had been dealing with Moksh 's custody case. Kalyani asks Malhar why he married her. Atharva walks in and tells the judge about what all had been happening there. Kalyani tells the judge that she never wanted to marry Atharva. Anupriya tells them that Atharva had abducted her. Aao Saheb tells the judge that she can prove that Anupriya was in Banaras and was not abducted by Athrava.She calls someone and asks about Anupriya and also inquires when she had left the hotel in Banaras. The person confirms that Anupriya was in the hotel. Anupriya says that she can't believe that Aao Saheb stooped so low and that she is supporting Atharva. Atul reprimands her. Sarthak warns Atul of speaking harshly with Anupriya. Sampada asks the judge to take a decision blaming Malhar that he married Kalyani. She asks Malhar why he had to marry Kalyani when he had come to rescue Anupriya. He stands speechless. Just then Aao Saheb receives a message that proves Anupriya was in Banaras and she shows it to the judge.Sarthak tries to convince the judge that all were lying. Judge says that the court of law works on evidence and not on emotions. The judge gives the custody of Moksh to Sampada and tells her that she can file a divorce from Malhar. She goes and picks up Moksh and gives him to Malhar. The judge warns Kalyani that they could be arrested for not abiding to the court's decision. Kalyani says she is fine in getting arrested but won't give the baby. Just then Malhar says that he agrees to the decision and everyone is shocked. He hands over Moksh to Sampada. Moksh starts to cry.Kalyani tells the judge that he has committed a crime by separating a father from his son. Kalyani cries in her room and Anupriya tries to console her. Atul walks in anger and tells Kalyani that today she proved to be Madhuri's daughter. Anupriya tells him not to blame Madhuri and to blame himself for being a bad father. Atul tells Anupriya that the reason she is supporting Madhuri is because she has an affair with Sarthak. Atul says that he will not divorce Anupriya and she will have to bear with him for the rest of her life.
