Didi hints at ESMA, says ‘outsiders’ inciting docs

ROBINSINGH@TRIBUNE.COM

Tribune News Service

Kolkata, June 15

Healthcare services in West Bengal continue to remain affected with adamant junior doctors failing to turn up at Chief Minister Mamata Banerjee’s office today as sought by her. However, later post midnight, agitating doctors said they were open for talks with CM Mamata Banerjee to end their stir at the venue they would decide.

Earlier, talking to the media, a miffed Mamata remarked, “If the government wants to hold talks with someone, it must be respected.” She said on Friday too she had waited for a delegation of doctors for five hours. She was later told the doctors would meet her today. “I reached the Secretariat, cancelling other engagements. The Health Minister, Finance Minister, Chief Secretary and Health Secretary too came, expecting to meet the protesting doctors. But they did not show up,” she said. Alleging that the doctors were playing to the tunes of “outsiders”, she mentioned steps, including invoking ESMA, that various governments had resorted to from time to time to tackle stirs by health professionals. “There is also a SC verdict upholding cancellation of registration of agitating doctors,” she warned, claiming when she had visited SSKM Hospital two days ago, she was pushed and abused by the doctors but she chose to ignore them.

“All demands have been met. The police have arrested five persons involved in the NRS Hospital incident and the court has refused them bail. Besides, steps had been taken to upgrade the security of doctors,” she said. She appealed to the doctors to end their stir which they launched after two of their colleagues were attacked by relatives of a patient who died.

Enact law to protect them: centre to cms

New Delhi: Union Health Minister Harsh Vardhan on Saturday asked states to consider enacting a legislation for protecting doctors and medical professionals from violence. Along with a letter to CMs, he attached a copy of the Draft Act provided by the IMA — the Protection of Medical Service Persons and Medical Service Institutions (Prevention of Violence and Damage or Loss of Property) Act, 2017. The Indian Medical Association (IMA) has called for a nationwide strike on June 17. PTI
