Doctors' strike: MHA seeks report from WB govt

New Delhi, Jun 15 (UNI) The Ministry of Home Affairs (MHA) on Saturday issued another advisory to the West Bengal government on the ongoing strike by the doctors and sought a report on the matter urgently.

'This Ministry is in receipt of a number of representations from doctors, health care professionals and medical associations from different parts of country for their safety and security, in view of the ongoing strike by the doctors in West Bengal,' a statement issued by the Ministry, said.

'It is requested that a detailed report be sent urgently on the representations and ongoing strike by the doctors,' it added.

As the strike by the doctors in West Bengal entered day 5 on Saturday, doctors across the nation expressed solidarity towards their brethren and in different ways marked their protest against violence inflicted on West Bengal doctors.

Meanwhile, AIIMS RDA Delhi issued an ultimatum to the government of West Bengal, to meet the demands of the striking doctors, stating that unless the demands are met, the indefinite strike at AIIMS Delhi will continue.

Doctors from medical institutions like RML, LHMC, GTB, DDU, Sanjay Gandhi, Ambedkar, Guru Govind Singh, ESI Vasaidharapur, Dada Dev Shishu Chikitsalay, IHBAAS, Hindurao, Bhagwan Mahavir, Chacha Nehru, Railways Hospital, all came in solidarity for the safety of doctors in West Bengal.

The medicos were on a symbolic strike for the cause, wherein their routine operations are likely to be non-functional, however, emergency operations will not be hampered, said the agitators.

Delhi medicos under the Federation of Resident Doctors Association (FORDA) are likely to intensify their agitation, in support of West Bengal doctors, if required.

Several doctors continued to work, wearing helmets and bandages, to mark their protest.

Several hospitals across Delhi are continuing their protest for the same cause ,while doctors' organisations had also written to the government, demanding several security measures for the fraternity, especially at government hospitals.

UNI APS-AKS RJ 1622
