DNA Edit: End doctors’ stir – Poor, who use government hospitals, are worst hit

Someone needs to get the agitating medics back into their hospitals and wards. It should be considered singularly unfortunate that politicians are willing to use the medical fraternity to attain their narrow – and in the case of West Bengal – frustrated objectives. The high handedness of West Bengal Chief Minister Mamata Banerjee knows no bounds. Instead of reasoning with doctors - as she finally has today - Mamata has been issuing ultimatums and blaming political opponents. The ongoing strike by West Bengal doctors against the murderous attack on a fellow professional at the NRS Medical College, Kolkata, has shaken up the fraternity not just in India, but around the world. Major hospitals in various cities are holding solidarity marches, instead of attending to critically ill patients.

Over the past week, emergency wards, outdoor facilities and pathological units of many state-run medical colleges and hospitals have been non-functional, leaving poor patients in the lurch. The countrywide impact is evident in the national capital. Major government-run Delhi hospitals such as AIIMS and Safdarjung have held protest marches, while the Resident Doctors Association (RDA) of AIIMS is on hartal. Things have reached such a stage that the president-elect of the World Medical Association has, in a video message, condemned the violence against doctors. It is time for saner counsel to prevail.

Sadly, the point that has been missed in the entire fracas is that government-run hospitals cater to the lowest of the low strata of society, who cannot afford expensive health care and are almost entirely dependent upon the state for succour. It is they who are the worst hit, as affluent sections of society can always avail of private and expensive health services. That politicians, like the West Bengal chief minister, who swear by the poor, think nothing of ditching their constituency, is a telling commentary on the times we live in.
