Upper House is a rehab centre, why Cabinet positions for MLCs, wonders Karnataka Congress MLA K Sudhakar

Bengaluru: Two-time Congress MLA Dr. K Sudhakar has the JD(S)-Congress regime need not consider members of the Legislative Council (MLC) -- Karnataka 's Upper House -- for Cabinet positions.In a chat with The Economic Times on Sunday, he called the upper house a white elephant, and a political rehabilitation centre for sections of politicians and industrialists, and wondered if the House benefited the State at all. “They (MLCs) can play an advisory role and provide inputs to the Assembly, but why representation in the Cabinet?”"The original purpose of creating an Upper House, both at the Centre (Rajya Sabha) and in Karnataka (Legislative Council) was that they, as house of elders, will supplement the Lower House in raising the quality of debates and help with law making. But that has degenerated over a period of time with these bodies used for either political rehabilitation or nominating wealthy industrialists," Dr.Sudhakar, who represents Chikkaballapur in the Assembly said.In the Karnataka context, he said: “Each MLC gets as much fund as an MLA for area development. They (MLCs) don’t have a constituency. Let the government evaluate what they have done with the funds allocated to them. It is worthy of a research. My Chikkaballapur constituency with 400 plus villages and one district headquarters, for instance, gets Rs 2 crore per year. Is this sufficient for the entire year? For everything, people run to their MLAs, and hold them to account, not MLCs.”The Congress MLA also suggested that senior party ministers, who enjoyed power under the previous Siddaramaiah regime, should quit and pave way for meritorious young MLAs in the Cabinet, and help resolve the political crisis in Karnataka.“A few leaders, who were ministers before, remain ministers even now. They should voluntarily give up their positions, and make way for worthy youngsters. That will bring about some sort of political stability to the government,” the 44-year old MBBS graduate, who has done a corporate stint before, said. The political instability in Karnataka, he added, is because of displeasure among the MLAs from both Congress and JD(S).According to him, the JD(S) and the Congress performed poorly in the recent Lok Sabha polls despite programmes such as loan waivers mainly because the political events of the day have taken a toll on CM’s focus on governance. “Governance and development will suffer as long as political instability haunts the CM,” he said.“Investors will not come to a state that is fighting political instability. Without investment, where is new economic activity or job creation, or fresh funds for development? Secondly, bureaucracy will not be proactive in such a climate. Leaders of both Congress and JD(S) should put their heads together and do serious corrections. Just cosmetic changes won’t help,” Dr.Sudhakar said.Asked if he would quit the Congress and join BJP, the MLA replied: “I am optimistic things should improve in the Congress. I, however, will need to take sensible and rational decisions about my political future. I will of course consult people in my constituency and my party leaders before taking the final call.”
