Shocking intel report! ISIS suspects held in Coimbatore were planning big attacks on temples and churches

Tamil Nadu ISIS module mastermind Mohammed Azarudeen | Photo Credit: PTI

Coimbatore (Tamil Nadu): The Islamic State (ISIS) module, three members of which were arrested by the Tamil Nadu Police last week, were planning big attacks in the southern state. A copy of the first information report, filed by the Coimbatore Police on June 12, a copy of which is with Times Now, shows that temples and churches were on the hit list of the module, which was in the stages of taking shape and being strengthened.

The Coimbatore Police has also submitted a special report on the matter in which it has revealed the shocking intelligence details. The report states that the module had been recruiting members for the ISIS. Further, it was translating ISIS propaganda from Arabic into Tamil and distributing to future recruits in the state.

Earlier, the terror suspects arrested in connection with the Tamil Nadu ISIS module were remanded to judicial custody on Saturday. Among the three arrested are Mohammed Azarudeen alias Mohammed Hussain, the alleged mastermind of the module. The other two suspects are Shajahan and Safiullah.

The three suspects were arrested by the National Investigation Agency (NIA) following raids at seven locations across Coimbatore. It may be noted at all three arrested suspects were an active supporter of Sri Lankan suicide bomber Zahran Hashim, who was killed in the Easter bombings in the island nation in April.

Mohammed Azarudeen was, in fact, a Facebook friend of Zahran Hashim. The three are also radicalised supporters of the ISIS terror group and were involved in propagating the group's ideologies on social media.

During the raids, the NIA had recovered 14 mobile phones, 29 SIM cards, 10 pen drives, three laptops, six memory cards, four hard disc drives, an internet dongle and 13 CDs/DVDs from the seven locations. Further, the agency sleuths had also seized a dagger, an electric baton, 300 air-gun pellets and several incriminating documents.

Shockingly, the agency recovered a few pamphlets of Popular Front of India (PFI) and Social Democratic Party of India (SDPI). Both the organisations are already being probed by the NIA for terror links.

The NIA had on May 30 registered a case in the matter and named six Coimbatore residents as suspects, including 32-year-old Azarudeen.

Azarudeen is believed to be running a Facebook page by the name "KhilafahGFX", which he was using to propagate the ideology of the ISIS.
