Mamata Banerjee succeeds in breaking logjam, doctors call off strike after 7 days

Mamata Banerjee had declared that her hour-long meeting with protesting doctors was "successful". (Photo: PTI)

The junior doctors at NRS Medical College and Hospital in Kolkata have called off the strike after meeting with Chief Minister Mamata Banerjee. The strike ended after seven days.

"Our meeting and discussion with the chief minister met a logical end. We temporarily withdraw from our ceasework. Considering everything we expect the government to solve the issues as discussed in due time," a spokesperson of the joint forum of doctors said after a meeting of the governing body of the forum at the Nil Ratan Sircar Medical College and hospital.

The breakthrough came after Mamata Banerjee held a meeting with representatives of the striking doctors at the state secretariat.

In a statement, the junior doctors said, "We extend our heartfelt gratitude to CM Mamata Banerjee. After an enormous movement, the meeting and discussions with our chief minister met a logical end. Considering everything, we expect the government to solve the issues as discussed in due time."

Junior doctors of #NRSMedicalCollege & Hospital, Kolkata: We extend our heartfelt gratitude to the CM. After an enormous movement, the meeting and discussions with our CM met a logical end. Considering everything we expect the govt to solve the issues as discussed in due time. pic.twitter.com/QSF9NZc24E June 17, 2019

They also thanked the medical fraternity across the country for their support during the strike.

"We extend our heartfelt gratitude to all seniors, juniors, patients, common people, intelligentsia and the medical fraternity of the country who spontaneously extended their support and made this movement possible. We hope to maintain this unity in future," the doctors said.

Jr doctors of #NRSMedicalCollege Kolkata: We extend our heartfelt gratitude to all srs, jrs, patients, common people, intelligentsia & medical fraternity of the country who spontaneously extended their support&made this movement possible. We hope to maintain this unity in future. pic.twitter.com/Q1CjBWqsgU ANI (@ANI) June 17, 2019

Bengal Governor KN Tripathi welcomed the resolution of doctors' crisis and thanked Mamata Banerjee for taking the initiative to break the logjam.

"The Governor is happy that amicable settlement has been arrived at the meeting held today between the Chief Minister and the doctors," an official statement from the Governor's office read.

It also said, "He (Governor Tripathi) appreciates the initiative taken by the Chief Minister and also the junior doctors to resolve the impasse."

"He hopes that the doctors will take up the work of care and treatment of patients as per the high ideals of their noble profession," the statement read.

After the meeting between the chief minister and the junior doctors, West Bengal CM Mamata Banerjee accepted the various demands made by the doctors including the proposal to set up a grievance redressal cell in government hospitals.

The doctors' delegation apprised Mamata Banerjee of the problems they have been facing at medical colleges and hospitals and said they fear for their safety.

West Bengal health secretary, MoS Chandrima Bhattacharya and other state officials were present in the meeting, besides 31 junior doctors.

CLICK HERE TO READ WHAT HAPPENED AT THE MEETING

After Mamata Banerjee announced steps to scale up security at hospitals, the representatives of the striking doctors at the state secretariat said that they were satisfied with the talks.

Mamata Banerjee also declared that her hour-long meeting with protesting doctors was "successful".

The junior doctors of Bengal had gone on strike on June 11 protesting assault of their two colleagues by relatives and well wishers of a patient who died in NRS hospital on Monday last.

The end of the strike came as a big relief to hundreds of patients as health services were paralysed across the state for a week.

"We have decided in our governing body meeting that we will be returning to work as soon as possible," the spokesperson for doctors' forum said.
