Lack of science is the basis of claims that bt brinjal is 100% safe

This is a response to two blog pieces that Sanjeev Sabhlok has written here (Part-1) and here, (Part II) in response to my article which was a rebuttal to his misinformed first article.

Let us begin with Sabhlok’s over-simplistic and unreasoned calculations of Bt brinjal production in Bangladesh – he first says that Bt brinjal is being grown on 17% of brinjal cultivation area of Bangladesh. This is incorrect and is grown on just about 3% of Bangladesh’s brinjal area. There are reports of government agencies’ seed stocks lying without any takers. Sabhlok then assumes that yield has doubled and therefore, consumption of Bt brinjal by Bangladeshis would be 35% of production from “double productivity”! If this is “science” from Sabhlok’s stable, then science be better protected from him.

Bangladesh Government’s official data on Brinjal in the country

Area (in Acres) Production (in Tons) Yield (in Kgs per Acre) 2013-14 Rabi Brinjal 73000 310,000 4246 2013-14 Kharif Brinjal 27000 69,000 2055 2014-15 Rabi Brinjal 76000 310,000 4064 2014-15 Kharif Brinjal 46000 140,000 3063 2015-16 Rabi Brinjal 78000 310,000 4335 2015-16 Kharif Brinjal 46000 165,000 3574 2016-17 Rabi Brinjal 80195 347,541 4334 2016-17 Kharif Brinjal 45665 159,891 3501 2017-18 Rabi Brinjal 80168 355,862 4414 2017-18 Kharif Brinjal 45760 160,145 3500

Sabhlok should know, if he is really keen on educating himself, that the Bt brinjal seeds of BARI are grown mainly in Rabi season, given that they are more suitable for Rabi cultivation. The official picture of yields is clear enough from the above table. Where is the double productivity that he is talking about? Like they say these days, “matlab, kuch bhi…”, eh?

Sabhlok then goes on to explain how he concluded, all by himself even though IFPRI did not set about to prove anything of this sort, that IFPRI study has conclusively proven that Bt brinjal is perfectly safe!! His unacceptable reasoning is that a Minister gave a quote after an IFPRI presentation somewhere, and that is how he referred to the perfect safety proven by IFPRI!! “The IFPRI’s data on pesticide use led their Minister to say that the Bangladesh government has ensured that the improved GM varieties do not harm human or environmental health. That’s the “perfect” safety I referred to.” Sorry, Sabhlok, I am supposed to trust this devious genius of yours? No, thank you.

Sabhlok, out of great kindness of course, warned me against becoming a “useful idiot” for pesticide companies. Alas, if only he would do his homework properly before ranting like this. He should know that people like me were opposing pesticides as a deadly technology long before he picked up the cause now. He should also know that we have a public interest litigation going on in the Supreme Court for getting many pesticides banned. He should know that the companies which are peddling GM seeds are the same ‘saviours’ which continue to make money on pesticides too. He should also know that when it comes to pest management, it is the same obsolete S&T in both pesticides and transgenics, and post-modern pest management science has moved on quite far away from this. He should certainly not become a useful idiot himself. Meanwhile, it is the civil society groups which are able to take real pest management solutions to farmers which don’t have to rely on either of these toxic technologies.

He also did not educate himself about the Supreme Court’s Technical Expert Committee and thinks that Monsanto-sponsored Paroda is to be listened to, and while five other INDEPENDENT scientists, including ones nominated by the Union of India, lacked scientific scrutiny on their report. He should go through the TEC reports to realise that they have indeed done an analysis of the raw data from the biosafety dossiers of Bt cotton and Bt brinjal and pointed to lack of safety of these GMOs. I certainly trust the independent scientists who have no stake in this, than the conflict-of-interest laden Paroda, and his one dissenting voice.

Coming back to the question of Safety, Sabhlok assumes for me, and says for himself, that safety for the consumer is paramount. No, for me, safety, autonomy and sustainability for the farmer is equally paramount for any technology. So, safety to environmental resources is also a major concern other than health safety for consumer. On these counts, GM certainly is toxic to the environment (including because of increased chemical use with pesticides and herbicides that go hand in hand with GM seeds) and restrictive of farmers’ choices (surely Sabhlok is aware of Monsanto suing and jailing farmers in North America?), and Sabhlok knows this, I am sure.

About food safety – Sabhlok once again claims that no human illness has been reported from GM food consumption. This is a limited view of health impacts, which presumes that somebody will have acute poisoning from a toxic food and immediately rush to a hospital or whatever. No, chronic impacts will not be reported by someone rushing to Sabhlok and connecting it back to what they have eaten. This, I am sure he knows too. He says that life expectancy increasing is his evidence that GM foods are not causing anything. Ridiculous. With modern day medical science, you can prolong the life of someone, but let us not forget all the diseases around us. Life expectancy increases at an average level (including by addressing communicable diseases) do not nullify increase in non-communicable diseases. Having said that, there is this study on GE crops, glyphosate and the deterioration of health in the USA whose data analysis shows very strong and highly significant correlations between the increasing use of glyphosate, GE crop growth and the increase in a multitude of diseases (in the USA).

The Science Academies stamp or the EPA stamp (apparently the most favourite agency of Sabhlok) does not matter, since they have been proven to be biased and ridden with conflict of interest time and again, in India as well as elsewhere. Entire books have been written about it. The ongoing cases about Glyphosate, which was passed off as Safe for decades, are a great proof about these regulatory agencies’ functioning. May be Sabhlok needs a reminder about the plagiarised and less than scientific report that the Indian science academies came up with in 2010. If he wants to believe their report as the last word on the subject, good luck to him!

About Bt in particular – we do know that external Bt sprays are also known to have harmful impacts, and when the protein is inside a plant, with a different mode of function, they have greater impacts. A recent study points out the additional dangers with GM insecticidal proteins as opposed to naturally occurring Bt proteins. It is argued that Bt protein does not bind to gut receptors other than the target insect species. There is a body of evidence that Bt toxin can have sub-lethal effects on non-target insects and other invertebrates. That is where the environmental impacts of Bt crops come into the picture. However, there are also studies that have provided evidence that Cry proteins can bind to mammalian intestinal epithelial cells (here, here and here). There are still a number of gaps in our knowledge of the mechanism of Bt toxin action. There is also evidence that the toxin may operate through more than one mechanism depending upon the conditions. The real picture is that scientists cannot say for sure whether they have mapped all the membranous and non-membranous receptors, oligomerization mechanisms of the Cry proteins or even all the susceptible cell types.

That is where the precautionary approach comes in, which is a fairly well-accepted scientific and regulatory principle. It is in contrast to the approach that Sabhlok is advocating unwisely, that ‘harm needs to be proven conclusively’. With the pesticide industry’s help and such similar toxic industries’ help, I am sure he will wait endlessly for harm to be proven conclusively. We, meanwhile, know that certain technologies are unneeded and unwanted….we do not have to wait for safety to be proven conclusively, before erring on the side of caution.

I found it very funny that Sabhlok rushed to Ananda Kumar to vouch for the safety of Bt brinjal. Ananda Kumar is caught squarely, along with some other public sector scientists in India, in the controversy of a non-existent Bikaneri Bt Narma event which in fact turned out to be an event that Monsanto claims to be its technology or genetic material. He is a GM crop developer himself, and Sabhlok wants to have his last word on the subject from Ananda Kumar?? The ECI and ECII (Expert Committee I and II) of Bt brinjal became ignominious for such scientists (including Pental) giving a green signal to Bt brinjal safety, knowing fully well that their own product will come up next for a clearance. Jairam Ramesh rightly pointed this out in his moratorium decision note. Once again, Sabhlok is proving that he will rely on GM crop developers with their conflict of interest for vouching for the safety of a GM product than independent scientists like in the Supreme Court’s TEC. I wonder why?

About safety studies on GM crops, Sabhlok chose to ignore two compilations of studies which were pointing to adverse effects. In fact, our compilation is dated (2013) and dozens of studies have been published subsequently pointing to adverse impacts. If Sabhlok wants his questions answered, he can refer to this excellent publication: https://www.amazon.com/GMO-Myths-Truths-Citizens-Genetically/dp/0993436706. However, he wants to cite only some other studies and say that 95% of papers in best peer-reviewed journals are pointing to safety, and that there are only 5% studies pointing to adverse effects. A literature review on the safety assessment of GM crops rightly pointed out that most of these studies have been conducted by biotechnology companies responsible of commercialising these GM plants.

The most important aspect of Sabhlok’s lack of knowledge and wisdom about the complexity of Indian agriculture stems from his techno-centrism and thinking that there are silver bullet answers in technologies, that too seed technologies, that too only at the molecular level. Nothing can be more unwise and blinkered than this.

Sabhlok claims that organic is unproductive and uneconomic and once again ignores a vast body of evidence that is proving this to be untrue. Organic has been shown to be more profitable, and the ICAR network project has some impressive results to point to. Further, no organic farmer has ever reached such a distress level that s/he had to commit suicide, whereas the farmers who are committing suicides are ones who have been trapped into corporate toxic treadmill technologies, including Bt cotton. Yes, this is indeed a matter of life and death, and not just slogan-shouting around “technology freedom”.

Facebook Twitter Linkedin Email Disclaimer Views expressed above are the author's own.
