Lok Sabha Election 2019: PM Modi slams Opposition unity rally, says 'Mahagathbandhan an alliance among the rich, corrupt'

PM:They've formed alliances with each other.We've formed alliance with 125cr countrymen.Which alliance do you think is stronger?Most leaders at that stage in Kolkata were either son of influential ppl or were trying to set their own children.They've 'dhanshakti',we've 'janshakti' pic.twitter.com/DfeqN5oTXj — ANI (@ANI) January 20, 2019

PM Modi in an interaction with BJP workers from Maharashtra & Goa: Because of the previous governments, political workers are usually known as 'dalaal' (middleman) among common public. However, our workers are known as 'Maa Bharti Ke Laal'. pic.twitter.com/32Dk3AmL4K — ANI (@ANI) January 20, 2019 Prime Minister Modi urged the party cadres to make songs along these lines in local dialect to popularise the schemes being run by the Central and the state governments of the BJP.

Prime Minister Narendra Modi Sunday pressed an attack on the Opposition parties and termed the show of strength by opposition parties in Kolkata on Saturday as 'an alliance among the corrupt'. He called the 'Mahagathbandhan' as a unique type of alliance. "They've formed alliances with each other. We've formed alliance with 125cr countrymen. Which alliance do you think is stronger? Most leaders at that stage in Kolkata were either son of influential ppl or were trying to set their own children.They've 'dhanshakti',we've 'janshakti'." He was addressing the BJP's booth level workers of Maharashtra and Goa through video conference, where he further said, "This 'Mahagathbandhan' (grand alliance of opposition parties) is a unique type of alliance. This alliance is between the 'Naamdaars.' This alliance is all about nepotism, corruption, scams, negativity, instability, and inequality. This is a very unique merger."Prime Minister further said that the oppositions have already started making excuses for their defeat in 2019 polls. He took a potshot at the opposition parties for their concern over the efficacy of electronic voting machines (EVMs) and said the opposition parties have made EVM as villain. He further said, they think that the general public is fool and so the ministers keep on changing their colors. "It's natural that every political party wants to win the polls, but it's worrisome when some parties take public for granted. They consider public stupid and so keep changing colours," PM said in his speech.
