NHRC notice to Bihar on child deaths, toll 103

shalender@tribune.com

TNS & Agencies

Patna/New Delhi, June 17

The National Human Rights Commission (NHRC) on Monday issued a notice to the Bihar government and the Union Health Ministry seeking a report on the growing number child deaths caused by the encephalitis virus in the state’s Muzaffarpur district.

The NHRC has taken suo motu cognisance of media reports about the rising number of deaths of children due to Acute Encephalitis Syndrome (AES) in Muzaffarpur since the past few days. The human rights body said the Bihar encephalitis death toll had reportedly gone up to 103 by Monday. It is also reported that, apart from Muzaffarpur, some other districts of the state have also been affected.

The Commission has sought a detailed report in the matter, including the status of implementation of the National Programme for Prevention and Control of Japanese Encephalitis Virus/ Acute Encephalitis Syndrome and other steps taken to deal with the current grim situation. It also wanted to know about the status of the treatment being provided to the hospitalised children and the relief provided by the state to the aggrieved families. The response to the notice is expected within four weeks.

The Commission has observed that in spite of reported measures taken by the government agencies, deaths of children in such a large number point to possible flaws in implementation of the vaccination and awareness programmes. Not only vaccination but all precautionary measures, such as cleanliness and hygiene, among others, are also required to be taken sincerely to ensure that children do not fall prey to the fatal disease, it observed.

Meanwhile, Health Minister Harsh Vardhan today said five virology labs would be set up in Muzaffarpur to address the challenge of child deaths due to AES and Japanese Encephalitis.

The minister has directed a high-level multi-disciplinary team to be sent to Bihar immediately. “To establish the cause of the disease, there is urgent need for an inter-disciplinary, high-quality research team. The research team shall work with the children suffering from encephalitis,” he said.

‘Flaw in vaccination’

The NHRC has observed that despite reported measures taken by govt agencies, deaths of children in such a large number indicate a ‘possible flaw’ in implementation of vaccination and awareness programmes
