When junior doctors called off strike like 'good boys'

KOLKATA: The longest cease-work in recent memory in Bengal’s public-sector healthcare system ended on Monday evening, with junior doctors promising to resume duty on Tuesday morning, exactly a week after their stir crippled outpatients’ departments and severely affected emergency wards across the state.Ultimately, it took one sentence from the “abhibhabak (guardian)” to end the stalemate in which doctors from across the country got involved. “Lokkhi chhelera, ebar tomra strike tule nao. Ekhane ektu mishti kore bolo, okhane giye ektu joralo golaye bolo (Now please withdraw your strike like good boys. Say it sweetly here even though you may have to say it a little more strongly once you return to your campus),” Bengal CM Mamata Banerjee told a team of 31 junior doctors, who represented their community, at a meeting in Nabanna on Monday evening.In the end, the junior doctors’ insistence on a meeting in front of TV cameras — and the government’s reluctant consent — turned out to be a masterstroke for Banerjee. The Bengal CM came out as the stateswoman — “guardian and protector” to the striking junior doctors (in their words) who calmly negotiated a tricky dialogue — in about 100 minutes of live TV broadcast that was watched with as much interest on the NRS campus in Kolkata as at AIIMS, New Delhi.The doctors, who had adopted a strident posture against the administration for the initial police inaction against the kin of a bereaved patient at NRS last Monday (the incident that triggered the stir) and then escalated the pitch after Banerjee issued a stern warning of action against the strike during her visit to SSKM Hospital last Thursday, relented in the face of some gentle persuasion and genuine-sounding assurances from the CM. What must have also played on their mind was the rising public opinion against the continuing strike, especially after the CM’s appeal for talks last weekend.The protesting doctors returned to NRS on Monday evening and, after another general-body meeting (that looked like a mere formality after the spontaneous applause that greeted the end of the meeting with the CM at Nabanna), came to say that one sentence that millions of patients depending solely on the state-run healthcare system were waiting for: “We hereby announce the withdrawal of the strike by junior doctors.”Chants of “lakshmi chhele!” immediately rang through the campus, replacing the cries of “bahiragata (outsider)” that had greeted IMA head and Trinamool MP Santanu Sen’s comments about the presence of outsiders in the ranks of the striking doctors last week.The euphoria was preceded by the Nabanna meet, which discussed several serious issues even though almost everyone knew what the end result — the withdrawal of the strike — would be.They ranged from security issues — collapsible gates for emergency wards, regulated entry for patients’ kin and enhanced police presence on medical campuses with nodal officers responsible for law-and-order — to the CM’s suggestion for third-party PR professionals who could act as grief counsellors and handle communication between “overworked doctors” and “aggrieved patients’ kin”, as well as grievance cells for patients.“We are delighted with the cordial manner in which the meeting was held, the CM’s caring touch and concrete suggestions and assurances to the issues raised by us. We came here for a discussion because we wanted a solution. The chief minister’s commitment has assured us that our concerns will be looked into and appropriate action will be taken against unwanted incidents,” one of the junior doctors said after emerging from the meeting.“We respect doctors and teachers. They have genuine demands. We have listened to them and taken decisions to resolve them. This must be a continuous process. We have to see to it that such untoward incidents are averted and strong action is taken if something happens,” Banerjee said.The gentleness, however, came with the message that she could not be bullied into doing anything. Urged by the junior doctors to visit Paribaha Mukhopadhyay, the doctor whose skull had been dented in the attack last Monday, and visit the NRS campus, Banerjee said: “Kichhu jinish amader opor chhere dao. Tomra amake katha na dile ami Paribaha ke dekhte jete parchhi na. Tomra katha dao tomra kaje jog debe (Leave certain things to us. You are holding me back. I am unable to go to Paribaha till you assure me. Give me your word that you will resume duty),” she said.The meeting went smoothly, but there were multiple hurdles in the build-up with junior doctors refusing to meet the CM at Nabanna till Saturday. Officials said it was director of medical education Pradip Mitra who played the crucial role of an interlocutor, defused the tension that had built up over the week and finally got the doctors to agree to meet the chief minister at the secretariat.
