Operation Sunrise: India-Myanmar target insurgent groups camp in North East

In the last five months the armies of India and Myanmar have launched two phases of joint operations along the Myanmar border targeting camps of insurgent groups operating in North East. Named Operation Sunrise, the strategy is aimed at hitting militant groups that are impacting both India and Myanmar.

The first phase of this operation was launched in February when several camps were destroyed in Myanmar close to the border, both in the north and south closer to Mizoram in India.

"There was actionable intelligence that many of them are regrouping. This prompted us to share information with Myanmar leading to the joint operations," said an official in the security establishment.

Sources said the two countries have to come to an understanding that whenever there will be intelligence on the activities and regrouping of this cadres and leadership such operations will be launched.

After facing heavy losses following coordinated operations by the Myanmar and Indian armies forcing the Naga rebel group NSCN (K) to shut camps in Taga, Myanmar, the faction is again regrouping to take control of the lost ground, intelligence reports indicate.

Nationalist Socialist Council of Nagaland (Khaplang) or NSCN (K) has been giving orders for reopening of the base area and council headquarters at Taga seriously.

Other than NSCN (K), the groups hit were Kamtapur Liberation Organisation (KLO), the the United Liberation Front of Assam, and the National Democratic Front of Boroland (NDFB).

In February when the first phase of the Operation Sunrise was launched, the trigger was a threat to the mega Kaladan Project.

The transit project will connect Kolkata to Sitwe port in Myanmar and finally end up linking Mizoram. This will be a new gateway to the landlocked North East reducing the distance from Kolkata to Mizoram by nearly a thousand kilometres bringing down the travel time by at least four days.

It is noteworthy that China has also been carrying out development projects at Kyaukpyu port near Sitwe.

While the militant group Arakan Army was pushed back then after they had reached the tip of Mizoram, sources said recent intelligence inputs reveal they could still be targeting the Kaladan Project and are making efforts to regroup.

The Arakan Army, an insurgent group in Myanmar set up new bases along the Mizoram border setting alarm bells in both the countries. This meant their cadres traveled hundreds of kilometres to come close to the southern most tip of Mizoram.

In the last two years the Kachin Independence Army (KIA) that trains the Arakan Army in the Kachin State of Myanmar adjoining China had readied around 3000 cadres.

Many of them moved to the south closing in on areas adjoining the Lawngtala district of Mizoram. This is the area that cuts through the proposed Kaladan project that will link Sitwe in Myanmar to Mizoram, sources said.
