Kasautii Zindagii Kay written update, June 17, 2019: Mr. Bajaj makes an entry; Anurag's business freezes

The latest episode of Kasautii Zindagii Kay begins with Veena thanking Mohini for understanding their kids' emotions. However, Mohini is not convinced and she thinks of Prerna as a curse in her family.Mohini thinks of a perfect plan to insult Prerna and her family in front of the guests. Anurag learns that all the cheques meant for payments have bounced back. He seeks help from an old friend of his father but he refuses. Anurag rushes to that person's house.When Anurag reaches out to their family friend, he turns him down saying that he can't help him out with a loan. While talking, Anurag realises the person has been lying to him. The man breaks down saying that his hands are tied as Mr. Bajaj 's eye is on the Basu publication and he will go to any extent. Anurag understands the situation and leaves.Frustrated, Anurag gets a call from Prerna. He tells him that Mr. Bajaj has created a new obstacle. Prerna assures him that they will fight to save this businessman together. Anurag calms down and tells Prerna he is heading home to complete engagement rituals.Back at the Basu house, Mohini adorns a fish with jewellery and gifts it to Veena as per tradition. Veena throws the plate in shock. She insults Mohini in front of everyone saying that despite knowing that they are vegetarians and don't even touch eggs, she did it on purpose as she has not accepted Prerna. Mohini smirks and thinks her plan has worked.Just when Anurag enters, Mohini complains to him saying that Veena thinks she hasn't accepted Prerna as his choice. Anurag apologises to Veena saying that his mother has only been following traditions. Mohini puts forth a condition that if Prerna wants to marry Anurag she will have to wear the jewellery laden on the fish.Prerna hesitates at first, but goes forward to touch the fish. Anurag takes it away from her hands and tells everyone that there is a way in which both their traditional sentiments won’t get hurt.Anurag goes ahead and washes the jewellery and then helps Prerna wear them. Everyone including Prerna appreciates this gesture. Mohini fumes in anger though.While all this happens at the Basu house, somewhere in Mumbai, Mr Bajaj makes a dashing entry in the office. All his employees shiver in his fear and think of never rubbing him off the wrong way.He heads to Gujral textiles to take over their business. In a very calculative move, Bajaj, bribes the employees of the Gujral and gives them a hike. In return, he tells them to go on a strike. Gujral had earlier decided to sell off his business to Mr. Bajaj with a good profit margin.Once Bajaj enters, he offers Rs 100 cr for a Rs 350 cr business property. When Gujral refuses, Bajaj shows him that his company’s shares have gone down because employees have gone on a strike. Seeing Bajaj’s shrewd proposal, Gujral sees no other option but agree to the deal.
