Flag Officer Commanding-in-Chief, Eastern Naval Command, pays a visit to Kolkata

KOLKATA: Vice Admiral Atul Kumar Jain, who took over as Flag Officer Commanding-in-Chief (FOC-in-C), Eastern Naval Command, paid a two-day visit to Kolkata starting Sunday. This was his first visit to the city after taking over as the FOC-in-C on May 30. During the visit Vice Admiral Jain reviewed combat preparedness with regard to coastal security and the various infrastructure projects at various stages of completion at naval units under the Naval Officer-in-Charge, West Bengal . He also interacted with officers, men and defence civilians at the INS Netaji Subhas.“Vice Admiral Jain was also the chief of staff of the Eastern Naval Command in 2016-17. During this visit to Kolkata, he called on West Bengal Governor Keshari Nath Tripathi and Lt Gen M M Naravane, GOC-in-C, Eastern Command. He also paid a courtesy visit to West Bengal chief secretary Malay Kumar De,” a senior officer said.The Bay of Bengal region falls within the jurisdiction of the Visakhapatnam-based Eastern Naval Command. This region is of strategic importance as a large number of cargo vessels pass through with crude and other valuable cargo. Several countries also have their military presence in the region, ostensibly to protect their interests. The Eastern Naval Command uses its assets – surface, sub-surface and aerial – to ensure that there is no infringement of India’s territorial waters or any threat to the nation.“There is also a constant threat from non-state actors approaching from the sea to create trouble on the mainland. The Navy’s offices in states like Tamil Nadu , Andhra Pradesh, Odisha and West Bengal co-ordinate to keep a lookout for any suspicious movement towards the coast. Apart from regular patrolling by vessels, fishermen are also used as the ‘eyes and ears’ to report any suspicious movement in their respective areas. The FOC-in-C, over his career spanning nearly 37 years while commanding corvettes and destroyers as well as crucial staff appointments, has gained expertise in protecting the country’s maritime boundary ,” the officer added.
