After poor performance of students in SSC, education minister Ashish Shelar announces increase in seats for FYJC

Ashish Shelar

seats for science

ISCE and CBSE boards

Teachers’ union unhappy with’s decision; feels it will drastically increase workload.The newly-appointed school education minister Ashish Shelar (in pic) announced that the number ofwill go up by five per cent while those in arts and commerce will increase by eight per cent for First Year Junior College (FYJC) admissions in Mumbai this year.However, colleges do not seem to be happy about Shelar’s announcement even though the move came after a poor performance of students in the SSC examination as they grappled with higher admission cutoffs in FYJC due to better results ofstudents. The Mumbai Junior College Teachers’ Union (MJCTU) even threatened to go on an indefinite strike if the government doesn’t withdraw its decision.Speaking at the ongoing Legislative Assembly session, Shelar said, “The education department will increase the number of seats in junior colleges, which are much in demand, as well as in other colleges.”Reacting to the decision, the MJCTU claimed that an increase in seats will add to the workload of teachers. “Currently, each division has 120 students. Now, the government wants to increase it to 130 seats and more. In that case, the workload of teachers will increase tremendously,” MJCTU president, Amar Singh, said. Currently, an aided division has 120 seats while an unaided one has a capacity of 80.Commenting further, Singh threatened that “if the government does not roll back the decision, teachers won’t go to colleges as a mark of protest. The government should resume those divisions which were shut due to lack of students instead of increasing the number of seats in each division,” he added. The union has more than 4,000 junior college teachers as its members.On Monday, Shelar had met principals of top junior colleges in the city to seek feedback on the solutions proposed by the education department. Earlier, former school education minister Vinod Tawde had proposed to exclude internal marks of CBSE and ISCE board students to create a level-playing field for SSC pupils in FYJC admissions as state board results were impacted by the discontinuation of internal exams in languages and social sciences subjects.Meanwhile, the education department announced that the second part of FYJC admission will commence from Wednesday and the first merit list will be displayed on July 6. The admission portal will be open until Sunday evening. Last year 2.3 lakh students had applied for 3 lakh seats.
