Tanushree Dutta terms Mumbai Police's report in Nana Patekar case 'corrupt', 'full of lies' - read statement

Tanushree Dutta issues fresh statement on Nana Patekar getting a clean chit from Mumbai Police in MeToo row | Photo Credit: Instagram



Days after the Mumbai police filed a B Summary report over Tanushree Dutta's sexual harassment accusations against Nana Patekar, the actress has now called the report 'false' and 'malicious'.

In a recent statement, Tanushree has expressed her disappointment over the report and said that it doesn't take into account the evidence that was submitted and could have proved that sexual harassment at workplace did take place.

Adding that the report is corrupt, Tanushree's statement read as, “The Mumbai police's B summary report that exonerates Nana Patekar and the other accused in the Horn ok please harassment case is a false and malicious report. It is a report that does not take into consideration the overwhelming evidence that was submitted to them which was actually quite enough to prove sexual harassment at workplace and make arrests provided it was their intention to do so.”

In her statement, Tanushree said, “This report is corrupt and full of lies and intended to repair public perception of the accused so that they can get back to work in Bollywood. Don't be surprised to hear any movie announcements soon as this clean chit was possibly bought with crores of rupees to resurrect Nana Patekar's failing Bollywood career.”

Tanushree made it clear that she stands by her statement “yesterday, today, tomorrow and forever” and added that nothing will change that.

“The law and order and judiciary in India is clearly a big failure as almost all the #metoo accused are still roaming free and getting reinstated in their jobs and the women who called them out get questioned on their integrity. This is a very bad example for the masses. Age old saga in our country as history repeats itself over and over again!!,” read her statement.

In the statement, Tanushree also dissed the government, religious leaders and Bollywood A-listers for their silence over the MeToo row and said, “the silence on part of the government, the spiritual Gurus of our nation, religious leaders and the A-list of Bollywood is deafening and displays their true conscience and the state of their heart and soul.”

Tanushree also added that while she stands by what she's been saying, she cannot continue to fight alone. Questioning the conscience of people and urging them to speak up, Tanushree's statement further read as, “I will stand by my statement forever but I'm done with this fight for now. Nitin Satpute, my advocate in Mumbai will be updating everyone on the legal updates on the matter!! One person, especially a woman alone cannot fight against an entire corrupt system. Unless others rise with me, I will not be able to continue to push back against this injustice. So the choice now is in your hands as my conscience is clear. I did the best I could and fought against evil as best as I could. I will have my reward in this life or the next but what about you?? I will leave this past behind me like a bad dream and still sleep well but what about you?? I will be able to face myself in the mirror and God someday but what about you??”

Tanushree, who had collaborated with Nana Patekar on Horn Ok Pleassss, had accused him of inappropriate behaviour and sexual harassment. During the police investigation, Tanushree alleged that her key witnesses received threatening phone calls from Nana Patekar and his aides. The closure report, which was filed by Oshiwara police station termed Tanushree's report a 'false complaint with malicious intent'.

The summary report also stated that there wasn't any mention of sexual misconduct in the complaints filed with Cine and TV Artists Association and the TV Producers Associations and rejected Tanushree's accusations stating, “choreographers, assistants, camerapersons, junior artists interviewed by police have not corroborated Tanushree's story”.


