Air India: 'This nonsense has to stop & will stop,' says Air India chief Ashwani Lohani on crew's tiffin fight

NEW DELHI: Air India will clamp down on the practice of pilots getting meals from home and then asking cabin crew members to heat it up or sometimes asking them to prepare a salad and even wash tiffin box afterwards. The decision was taken on Wednesday when TOI reported how a captain and flight purser of a Bengaluru-Kolkata flight this Monday had a fight when the former reportedly asked the latter to rinse his tiffin. AI has grounded both the crew members.AI chairman Ashwani Lohani said: “This nonsense has to stop and will stop.” Lohani has taken a very strict view of the fight on Bengaluru-Kolkata flight and both the crew members have been summoned to the airline’s Delhi HQ on Thursday for questioning.A senior cabin crew member said: “AI pilots often bring home tiffin boxes on board and ask crew to heat and serve that meal. There are often requests from pilots like asking crew to chop onion, roast almonds and cashews in honey and make cheese toasts and fruit salad. All this must stop as cabin crew are on board for passenger service and safety and are not personal cooks of pilots.”“On the other hand, pilots of private Indian airlines do not do this. Why so much drama in AI?” the crew member added.Earlier this year, AI had barred its pilots from ordering special meals for themselves and asked them to take the regular meals ordered by the airline. Flight caterers had complained it was a regular practice to get special meal requests from AI pilots.AI director (operations) captain Amitabh Singh had written a mail pilots this March saying: “It has been brought to (his) notice that flight crew are ordering special meal/s which is against rules. The only crew, who for medical reasons, may order for special meals, (that is) food recommended by doctor. (as per rules) ‘crew should adhere to the meal schedules laid down by the company and should not authorise meal uplift on their own’.”“In light of the above, all cockpit crew (pilots) are instructed not to order special meals as and when operating a flight / staff on duty movement. GM-catering to take note of the same and issue necessary instructions to all dealing heads. GM-catering to liaise with office of ED-operations to get a list of pilots, who will be requiring special food for medical purposes only. ED-operations to get the above instructions uploaded on crew portal on priority,” captain Singh’s order had said.
