Buzz grows louder around USMCA

Buzz grows louder around USMCA

With help from Doug Palmer

Editor’s Note: This edition of Morning Trade is published weekdays at 10 a.m. POLITICO Pro Trade subscribers hold exclusive early access to the newsletter each morning at 6 a.m. To learn more about POLITICO Pro’s comprehensive policy intelligence coverage, policy tools and services, click here

Quick Fix

— Trump administration officials and congressional Republicans are amping up pressure on House Democrats to move on the new U.S.-Mexico-Canada Agreement, even as Democrats warn against trying to rush them toward approval.

— Canadian Prime Minister Justin Trudeau is in Washington today to talk USMCA at the White House and on Capitol Hill.

— President Donald Trump isn’t expected to make a deal when he meets Chinese President Xi Jinping next week — but the administration hopes he can get talks back on track.

IT'S THURSDAY, JUNE 20! Welcome to Morning Trade, where your host is thinking she can strongly relate to new studies that show overly air-conditioned offices make women less productive. Any tips for the best type of portable space heater I can tote around Capitol Hill? Let me know: [email protected] or @mmcassella.

Driving the Day

BUZZ GROWING LOUDER AROUND USMCA: Momentum for the trade deal appears to be building in all three North American countries, even as it remains unclear whether Congress will move to approve the agreement this summer. Lighthizer returned to Capitol Hill on Wednesday, this time to make his case to the House Ways and Means Committee that he hears their complaints and is willing to address them in order to win their votes.

The U.S. trade chief sought to extend an olive branch to the panel’s Democrats by emphasizing that he, too, is focused on enforcement provisions in the agreement that could become a major part of his legacy. He also sought to minimize the differences between Congress and the administration on labor and environmental standards, saying the two sides could sit down and resolve issues “in a half a day.”

“I’m not on the other side," he told Rep. Earl Blumenauer, the trade subcommittee chairman, at one point. "I’m on the same side.”

Plotting a path forward: The nine lawmakers on the House USMCA working group, which Speaker Nancy Pelosi established to negotiate with the administration, planned to meet for the first time Wednesday evening. Rep. Richard Neal, the Ways and Means chairman who leads the group, told Morning Trade before the meeting that the goal was to “give some structure to the process” and refine members’ thinking ahead of an expected meeting with Lighthizer, which he said would hopefully come sometime next week.

Behind closed doors: A handful of moderate Democrats met this week with top diplomats from Canada and Mexico to discuss a shared sense of urgency to approve the deal. More on that closed-door dinner Tuesday night, which was hosted by the Canadian embassy and organized by the Progressive Policy Institute, here.

TRUDEAU MAKES HIS PITCH: Canadian Prime Minister Justin Trudeau is walking a tightrope in Washington today as he tries to advocate for the USMCA and work closely with Trump on China — while being careful not to step too far into the U.S. debate or to look too cozy with the White House.

Trudeau’s meeting with Vice President Mike Pence last month offers a preview of how he might try to thread the USMCA needle: Trudeau simply said he runs a progressive government and is proud of the progressive provisions in USMCA, but he won’t tell Democrats what to do. One Canadian official said the PM will express pride in USMCA, without going too far.

MEXICO GETS ITS USMCA DUTY DONE: Mexico became the first NAFTA country to ratify the new deal on Wednesday, with its Senate voting 114-4 in favor of the agreement. Lighthizer welcomed the news, hailing the ratification as “a crucial step forward.”

DEMS WARN NOT TO BREAK TRUST: With pressure building on Congress to move quickly, several Democrats urged Lighthizer at the Ways and Means hearing not to pressure them to move before they’re ready. Rep. Bill Pascrell (D-N.J.) also emphasized a need to respect the role of Congress and expressed concern that Trump “will try to jam us with an implementing bill the first chance he gets.”

“To build trust, will you commit to coming back to our committee before you send us the draft of the implementing bill? Will you commit to do that?” Pascrell asked Lighthizer.

“No,” Lighthizer replied.

GOP GROWING ANTSY ON NEW NAFTA: Many House Republicans spent time during the more than three-hour hearing Wednesday emphasizing the benefits of USMCA and urging their Democratic colleagues to move it along. Before the testimony even began, ranking member Kevin Brady and Rep. Vern Buchanan, the top Republican on the panel’s trade subcommittee, sent their counterparts a letter underscoring those points.

“Every day USMCA is delayed, America suffers,” Brady said in his opening statement.

‘Have to have patience’: Others were more upbeat on the deal’s prospects. Asked if the August timeline was still possible, Senate Finance Chairman Chuck Grassley responded with a single word: “Definitely.”

“I definitely get the feeling that Pelosi just needs time to get these issues worked out, but more importantly time to make sure that a lot of new members of the House of Representatives are comfortable with it,” the Iowa Republican told reporters. “We’re just going to have to have patience until she gets it done.”

WHERE’S SONNY ON USMCA? While lawmakers on both sides of the aisle have praised Lighthizer for his willingness to engage with them, one senior House Democrat is pushing for additional effort from other administration officials to move the deal forward. At the top of the list: Agriculture Secretary Sonny Perdue.

The USMCA will have “a huge impact on production and agriculture in our country, and Secretary Perdue is nowhere to be found up here, which is mind-boggling to me,” Rep. Ron Kind (D-Wis.) told Morning Trade on Wednesday. “If there’s one person who should be here knocking on doors and convening meetings, it’s him.”

A USDA spokesperson pushed back against the criticism, saying that “Perdue and the entire USDA leadership are heavily engaged in making sure USMCA gets across the finish line.” As evidence, the spokesperson highlighted nearly 200 town hall discussions the ag chief has held and said he touted the benefits of trilateral trade “at nearly every event.” None of the outreach the spokesperson highlighted dealt explicitly with lawmakers on Capitol Hill.

TEMPERING EXPECTATIONS FOR THE TRUMP-XI SUMMIT: Trump’s planned meeting next week with his Chinese counterpart will mark the leaders’ first sit-down in six months, but don’t expect anything major to come out of the discussion. A senior administration official told POLITICO’s Ben White that the major hope for the Osaka meeting is that the two leaders can put bilateral trade talks back on track and set up a framework for future negotiations.

A major question will be whether the Chinese show any movement on previous sticking points, such as legal changes surrounding forced technology transfers, the official said.

A big if: Lighthizer told Ways and Means members Wednesday that a U.S-China trade deal remains “a big ‘if.’” He added that both he and Treasury Secretary Steven Mnuchin will meet with Chinese officials in Osaka to lay the groundwork for the Xi-Trump summit. Doug has more here.

LIGHTHIZER DETAILS ‘SWISS FORMULA’ FOR PICKING FTA PARTNERS: Unless a trade deal with a foreign country is going to make some farmer, rancher or company in the United States “a little bit richer,” it probably isn’t worth the bother, Lighthizer said at the Ways and Means hearing.

He made the comment in response to a question about negotiating a free trade agreement with Switzerland. Lighthizer acknowledge the Trump administration was “exploring” the idea, but he seemed to downplay the possibility. The Republic of Georgia has also expressed interest in a trade pact with the U.S.

“When I’m asked about this, I always say to myself, ‘Tell me what more we’re going to sell you, right?’ I want to know why this is going to make somebody, somewhere in America … a little bit richer. If it doesn’t do that, it’s probably not worth my time,” Lighthizer said.

Still, the U.S. trade chief left open the door, saying he was still doing the analysis on Switzerland. He also repeated his hope of negotiating a trade deal with an African country and more members of the revamped Pacific Rim trade pact.

LAWMAKERS PRESS LIGHTHIZER ON CHINA TARIFFS: Lighthizer faced questions throughout the hearing from lawmakers worried about the impact of Trump’s tariffs on businesses and farmers in their districts. Reprising an answer from his testimony before the Senate Finance Committee, Lighthizer acknowledged imposing duties on potentially all Chinese goods only makes sense if you share the administration’s view about the gravity of the Chinese threat.

Rep. Jackie Walorski (R-Ind.) pressed Lighthizer on why products previously excluded from tariffs reappeared on the latest list targeting about $300 billion worth of goods. The trade chief indicated the administration decided on that strategy to put maximum pressure on Beijing. He also committed to creating an exclusion process for the $300 billion if Trump puts tariffs on those goods.

International Overnight

— The Commerce Department has denied a Freedom of Information Act request to release its Section 232 report on automobiles, POLITICO Pro reports.

— Chuck Grassley’s bill to rein in Trump’s tariff authority under Section 232 is unlikely to see daylight until after the August recess, POLITICO Pro reports.

— Trump is firing up his Wayback Machine and dusting off economic approaches that have gone largely unused in recent decades, POLITICO reports.

— Companies and countries are building up defenses to guard against trade-war fallout, experts said in the latest episode of POLITICO’s Global Translations podcast.

— Lighthizer is warning France not to impose a digital services tax, POLITICO Pro reports.

— The U.S. trade chief also says India could face additional trade actions unless it agrees to open its markets, POLITICO Pro reports.

— Sen. Mitt Romney (R-Utah) submitted an amendment to try to block Trump from using Huawei as a bargaining chip in trade talks, Bloomberg reports.

— Trump’s China tariffs could destroy the bridal gown industry, Fortune reports.

Follow us on Twitter Pradnya Joshi @pjoshidc



John Yearwood @john_yearwood



Doug Palmer @tradereporter



Gavin Bade @GavinBade



Steven Overly @StevenOverly
