Eat healthy. Farming goes organic in Coimbatore

Though Coimbatore was known as a hub of entrepreneurial farming, the organic cultivation scene had been rather bleak. The number of farmers as well as area under organic farming had been negligible in the district and there had hardly been any sign of pesticide free cultivation picking up. But the situation transformed after 2016, incidentally the year when neighbouring Kerala threatened to ban pesticide ridden vegetables coming from Tamil Nadu Since then there has been a 50% increase in the number of certified organic farmers and 45% increase in acreage. According to the Tamil Nadu Organic Certification Department, only 106 farmers had obtained the certification from 2007, when TNOCD was formed, to 2016. But in the past three years, the number has gone up to 160. At least 30 more farmers are likely to get certified in the next couple of months. The area under certified organic cultivation too has increased from 1,523 acres to 2,533 acres during the same period. Since TNOCD is recognized by the Agricultural and Processed Food Products Exports Development Authority, farmers can later apply for APEDA certification too if they intend to export their products.Officials in the department say most of their applicants are those who cultivate perennial crops - coconut , pulses, spices like pepper and turmeric and fruits like mango, sapotta - among others. “Only 20% of the farms we have certified cultivate vegetables, because vegetables are difficult to cultivate organically,” said assistant director of the organic certification department Irene Priyadarshini. “Since we have lost native variety seeds of vegetables, we depend on hybrid varieties produced by private companies, which are susceptible to pests and diseases,” she said.While these are parcels of land that have been certified, there are also many farmers who are part of the state government encouraged participatory guarantee scheme and Paramparagat Krishi Vikas Yojana (PKVY). “Under the participatory guarantee scheme, participants can certify each other. This scheme is extremely popular in areas like Thondamuthur and Anamalai Hills, where at least 30 farmers in each of those two blocks are involved in organic farming. They will apply for certification and pesticide residue tests in a year or two,” said a senior horticulture department officer. “While a few of them do vegetables, most are into cultivation of grapes, watermelon, nuts and spices, among others,” she said.However, the numbers are still a drop in the bucket considering that Coimbatore has 2 lakh hectares of cultivated land. “Many big farmers are still hesitant to get into organic farmers, because they believe that they may not sustain a crop till the soil slowly gets back its original bacteria and nutrients. Many are yet to be convinced that organic cultivation can be done commercially successfully. But the situation is improving. We get at least one new farmer walking through our doors every day, compared to hardly three or four in a month, five years ago," said head of sustainable and organic farming department, TNAU, E Somasundaram. "We also conduct training programmes for interested farmers along with personal guidance and field visits every month," he said.Organic farmers say the market for certified organic produce in the city is good. “The yield of organically cultivated crops is lesser than commercial crops, but we save on all the input costs. And certified produce is in high demand and sells at a better price. So, the net profit is as good as commercial cultivation and we feel good to cultivate safe and healthy food,” said Madhu Ramakrishnan, who cultivates coconut, nutmeg, pepper and betel leaves in his farm in Sethumadai.
