Executive MBA in Delhi NCR: Colleges, Program, Fees, Eligibility, Syllabus, Placement

Executive MBA programme in Delhi is offered by some of top MBA colleges in Delhi NCR including FMS, IIFT, IIT-Delhi, MDI Gurgaon, IMT Ghaziabad among others. Currently there are not many colleges offering Executive MBA in Delhi NCR but qualitatively, the MBA executive program in Delhi is much sought after in order to enhance leadership roles.

Executive MBA Programme in Delhi NCR is meant for the working executives of more than 2 years of working experience which can go up to 10 years. It is not a full time programme and is a modular program aimed at senior executives. Since it is not a regular full time MBA programme, the classes for MBA Executive programme are mostly conducted on weekends or in evening on week days. The programme duration may go from 15 months to 60 months depending upon the executive MBA programme structure.



Executive MBA Colleges in Delhi NCR

The list of some of the top executive MBA colleges in Delhi NCR with highlights of their respective MBA Executive Programme is shared below:

Institutes Offering Executive MBA in Delhi NCR Name of Executive MBA Programme in Delhi NCR Minimum Work Experience Required for Admission FMS Delhi MBA Executive 5 Years IIM Lucknow-Noida Campus Working Manager’s Programme (WMP) 3 Years IIT Delhi

Executive MBA 2 Years IIFT Delhi Executive Post Graduate Diploma in International Business (EPGDIB) 5 Years

Executive MBA Colleges in Delhi NCR: Programme Details

Below are shared the key details, eligibility, admission criteria, fee of MBA Executive Program in Delhi offered by each of the Executive MBA Colleges in Delhi NCR:

Executive MBA in FMS Delhi

Executive MBA at FMS Delhi is a low fee Executive MBA option at top MBA college in the country. The modular design of the two year evening MBA Executive and MBA Executive (Health Care Administration) programmes at FMS Delhi has been divided into four semesters over a period of two-years.

The Executive MBA programme at FMS offers opportunities to working executives/ administrators to customize their individual learning as per their unique strengths and interests. This is done through guest lectures, workshops, seminars, specific modules offered by experts from academia and industry. This ensures that the focus of the programmes is not on teaching, but on learning.

FMS Delhi Executive MBA: ProgrammeHighlights

Specialization offered in Functional Area such as Finance, Marketing, Operations, Strategy and Leadership, Information Technology, Entrepreneurship

2 Years Evening Programme with 1120 contact hours

Low Fee Programme with MBA Executive Fee of Rs.50,000/- payable in 2 yearly instalments

FMS Executive MBA 2021: Important Dates for Admission

Application Start Date: October 10, 2020

Last date to Apply: November 25, 2020

Application Fee: Rs.1000/-

Application Process: Online

Executive MBA FMS Delhi: Eligibility

Three-year Bachelor‘s Degree programme after twelve years of formal schooling

At least five years of experience as an executive or an administrator in a commercial/government establishment.

FMS Delhi Executive MBA Intake

MBA Executive-172

MBA Executive (Health Care Administration)-42

Executive MBA in FMS Delhi: Admission Criteria

For MBA Executive Admissions 2021 at FMS Delhi, applicants have to register themselves for admission to MBA Executive and MBA Executive (Health Care Administration) programmes by filling up online application form and by paying the requisite fee.

Academic – Graduation: Max 20 Marks (2 marks for every 5% marks over and above 40% marks subject to a maximum of 20 marks.) 2. Executive Experience: Max 20 Marks (2 marks for every one year of completed experience beyond 5 years of experience subject to a maximum of 20 marks.) 3. General Ability Test: Max 30 Marks

Selection Criteria & Weightage

Due to Covid-19 pandemic, FMS Delhi revised the admission 2020 criteria and awarded weightage to only three components namely, Academics, Executive Experience and General Ability Test.

However, following are the standard key components for MBA executive admission and are expected to remain in force for admission 2021 at FMS Delhi

Admission Component Maximum Weight Marks Remarks Academic- Graduation 20 2 marks for every 5% marks over and above 40% marks subject to a maximum of 20 marks Executive Experience 20 2 marks for every one year of completed experience beyond 5 years of experience subject to a maximum of 20 marks General Ability Test 30 A candidate is required to take a test on Management Aptitude and General Awareness as per the Date and Time to be announced by FMS Extempore 15 To be conducted individually for all the candidates Personal Interview 15 To be conducted individually for all the candidates Total 100 Merit List for Admission based on above parameters

FMS Delhi MBA Executive Fee

The Executive MBA at FMS Delhi is a low fee programme. Since FMS is a Government University, the annual fee for FMS Executive MBA is only Rs.50,000.

IIM Lucknow Working Managers' Programme (WMP) at Noida Campus

IIM Lucknow offers Working Managers' Programme (WMP), which is a Two-Year Post-Graduate Programme for Working Executives at its NOIDA Campus in Delhi NCR. After the inception of WMP in 2005, twelve batches are graduated. WMP alumni today are serving with distinction in senior business positions across the globe and playing the influential roles in their organizations.

The WMP is a uniquely designed programme for working executives, entrepreneurs and professionals, who desire to enhance their managerial knowledge and skills through formal management education while continuing to work full time in their ongoing professions/businesses.

IIM Lucknow WMP programme is structured to meet the learning needs and methodologies in such a way that one can continue to work and engage in formal education simultaneously. The programme maintains the high standards and rigor. WMP aims at developing strong conceptual fundamentals and skills required to manage businesses of the future.

IIM Lucknow WMP Executive MBA: Programme Highlights

WMP is a 2 years programme. First year consists of 4 terms and the second year consists of 3 terms

Alternative Weekend Programme. Students come to IIM Lucknow, NOIDA Campus on Friday afternoon and go back on Sunday afternoon, every alternative weekend

Each term, leaving Term-5, has 7 visits distributed over 3 months' period, approximately

Term-5 has 5 campus visits on alternate weekends and a two-week International Module

WMP classes commence in the month of April

On successful completion of the programme, the students get Post-Graduate Diploma in Management For Working Executives from IIM Lucknow

IIM Lucknow Executive MBA – WMP 2021: Important Dates for Admission

Application Start Date: October 15, 2020

Last date to Apply: January 31, 2021

WMP Entrance Exam: Expected in February 2021

Announcement of Shortlisted candidates: February 2021, last week

Writing Ability Test & Personal Interview: February last week to March first week, 2021

Announcement of Selected Candidates: March 2021, 2 nd week

week Programme Commencement: April 2021, 1 st week

week Application Fee: No Application Fee

Application Process: Online/Offline (Can apply in either mode)

Executive MBA IIM Lucknow: WMP Eligibility

A Bachelor's degree in any discipline or an equivalent academic pursuit (i.e., 10+2+3), with a minimum of 50% marks or equivalent CGPA

Score in one of the following tests: a. GMAT taken during January 16, 2016 – January 15, 2021; b. CAT / XAT / GATE score for the test taken in year 2019 onward; c. WMP Entrance Exam scheduled during last week of January 2021 at IIML Noida Campus;

A minimum of 3 years of full-time post-qualification (after graduation) professional experience as on March 31, 2021

Executive MBA in IIM Lucknow- Noida Campus: WMP Admission Criteria

Based on the scores in GMAT/ CAT/ XAT/ GATE/ WMP Entrance Exam, candidates are shortlisted for Writing Ability Test and Personal Interview

After WAT & PI are done, final score is calculated using test score, academic and professional profile, WAT and PI

Offer of admission is given based on the final score

The application process for IIM Lucknow WMP 2020 will open in October 2020.

IIM Lucknow Executive MBA: WMP Programme Fee

The fee for IIM Lucknow WMP 2021 is INR 13,55,000. A refundable caution money of INR 5,000, Alumni membership fee of INR 5,000 and Convocation fee INR 5,000 + Taxes need to be paid in addition to the academic fee. The fee includes tuition fee, computing and networking, library services, books, and instructional resources, boarding and lodging during campus visits, and visa, travel, accommodation and academic expenses for the international module.

Executive MBA from IIT Delhi

IIT Delhi Executive MBA is 3 years MBA in Technology Management. The Executive MBA programme at IIT Delhi is focused on ‘Technology Management’ and as such has different eligibility criteria than that of other MBA Executive programmes in Delhi NCR. This programme is designed to impart management education to working executives. The Classes are scheduled during evening hours (6.15 pm onwards) on 4 or 5 working days (Monday to Friday).

IIT Delhi Executive MBA: Programme Highlights

The programme is designed to impart management education to working executives

3 Years MBA Executive Programme

Evening classes 5 days a week

On completion of the programme students will be awarded Executive MBA Degree by IIT Delhi

IIT Delhi Executive MBA: Important Dates for Admission

Last date for submission of online application form 1 June 2021 Written aptitude test and Personal interview Expected in June 2021, third week Orientation and Registration for New Students July 2021, third week Commencement of classes August 2021, 1st week

Executive MBA IIT Delhi: Eligibility

Following qualifications and post academic work experienceis the eligibility criteria for admission to IIT Delhi MBA Executive programme:

First class degree or equivalent in Bachelor’s degree in any branch of Engineering / Technology; Bachelor’s degree in Physical Sciences (Physics, Chemistry, Mathematics); Bachelor’s degree in Statics, Operation Research, Computer Application, Economics, Commerce and CA/ICWAI

Minimum 60% marks in aggregate (of all the years / semesters) or 6.00 CGPA on a 10 point scale or equivalent.

2 years of post-qualifying degree work experience as on August 1, 2021

Executive MBA IIT Delhi: Admission Criteria

Desirous candidates should apply online along with online payment of Rs.2,500/- towards application fees.

Written Aptitude Test (WAT) and Personal Interview are conducted by I.I.T. Delhi for admission

While filling the form, candidates should ensure that they fulfill the eligibility criteria.

The short-listed candidates will be invited for Written Aptitude Test (WAT) and Personal Interview (PI).

On the basis of academic profile, work experience, WAT & PI, final admission offer will be made

IIT Delhi Executive MBA Fee

Executive MBA Fee at IIT Delhi isRs. 10.80 Lakhs for the entire Executive MBA Programme payable in equal installments (6 Semesters).

IIFT Delhi Executive MBA

Indian Institute of Foreign Trade (IIFT) offers 15 months Executive Post Graduate Diploma in International Business (EPGDIB). The Executive MBA in IIFT Delhi is designed to deliver the learning essentials for participants to prepare themselves to become dynamic leaders and learners, ready to take on new and challenging roles in the business world.

The participants are educated and oriented through EPGDIB to anticipate change and to adapt readily to new business environments. The Executive Post Graduate Diploma in International Business (EPGDIB) is an esteemed programme in International Business designed for working executives and is based on a comprehensive structure intended to deliver education in international business and its related aspects.

IIFT Delhi Executive MBA: Programme Highlights

15 Months MBA Executive Programme with weekend classes

At the beginning of each semester, the classes will be held for 5-7 days at IIFT Campus in New Delhi daily from 9:15 AM to 6:30 PM. After the Campus Visit, the classes will be held on every Saturday & Sunday at respective city centres.

IIFT offers two Executive MBA programmes – Executive Post Graduate Diploma in International Business (EPGDIB)-On Campus, and Executive Post Graduate Diploma in International Business (EPGDIB) -Hybrid(On campuse+Online)

EPGDIB aims at enhancing the managerial competence of senior and middle level executives by imparting systematic knowledge in all aspects relating to international business

Specialization is available in International Business, International Marketing and International Finance

Programme offers International Port Visit of one week. International Port Visit is a unique feature of IIFT MBA Executive programme. The tuition fee will cover the travel and accommodation cost of the participants for the port visit

IIFT Delhi Executive MBA: Important Dates for Admission

Last Date to Apply for Admission May 15, 2021 Application Fee Rs.2,000/- Application Process Online Commencement of EPGDIB (On-campus) and EPGDIB (Hybrid) August 2021 first week

Executive MBA IIFT Delhi: Eligibility

Admission to IIFT MBA Executive Programme is based on candidates’ fulfillment of eligibility conditions and ability to synchronize programme objectives with personal career goals. The Executive Programme is open to working managers and self employed individuals who meet the following criteria:

Graduation or equivalent degree from any recognized University or Institution with Managerial work experience of minimum 5 years after graduation, OR

Post-Graduate Degree/ Engineering Degree or equivalent from any recognized University or Institution and managerial work experience of minimum 3 years

Minimum 50% marks in graduation/Post graduation/Diploma in Engineering

Only managerial work experience until 31th July is considered

No Objection Certificate from the employer is required at the time of admission for sponsored candidates

No age limit for applying

Executive MBA IIFT Delhi: Admission Criteria

After the applications are submitted, an IIFT faculty committee reviews all applications and shortlists candidates based on their qualifications and work experience

Shortlisted candidates will be called for Group Discussion and Interview at IIFT Delhi for admissions in EPGDIB (On-Campus)

Admissions to EPGDIB (Hybrid) is based purely on Shortlisting of candidates by the faculty committee

IIFT Delhi Executive MBA Fee

The fee for the IIFT Delhi Executive MBA programme is Rs 5,10,000/- (including alumni charges). The Fee is to be paid in three installments by candidate who have been offered admission in EPGDIB (On-campus)/ EPGDIB (Hybrid). SC/ST/PWD Candidates are offered 50% fee concession on tuition fee.

Executive MBA is not neessarily One year MBA

Executive MBA in India should not be confused with One Year MBA. Executive MBA is generally a modular program offered for senior executives who don’t wish to leave their well-paying full-time jobs for earning MBA credentials. The one year MBA is full time residential programme which aims to complete MBA at an accelerated pace. Read all about one Year MBA

Executive MBA Vs Part Time MBA

Executive MBA targets senior executives with longer experience, while part time MBA can be pursued by the candidates with 2+ years of work experience and in some cases by those who have even lesser work experience. Part time MBA is Not restricted only to managerial level executives. Besides, Part time MBA is a low fee programme as compared to Executive MBA. Read all about the Part time MBA
