Telangana CM to waive Rs 24,000 crore farm loans, hike pensions

Chief Minister K. Chandrasekhar Rao inspects the site where he will perform five-day Maharudra Sahita Sahasra Chandi Maha Yagam from Monday at his farm house in Erravalli.

Hyderabad: In the Assembly on Sunday, Chief Minister K. Chandrasekhar Rao declared that Rs 24,000 crore of farmers’ loans would be waived and promised disbursing of increased sums under Asara and Rythu Bandhu will begin from the next financial year.

Replying to the debate on the thanksgiving motion to Governor E.S.L. Narasimhan’s speech to the joint session, the chief minister criticised the former Congress government of ignoring land surveys.

“I promise all farmers that we will complete cleansing of land records through a comprehensive rectification to ensure total transparency. Till now, we have handed over land passbooks to 54 lakh farmers. The Dharani website for the updating of land records will also become functional from the next financial year.”

The Congress had neglected the farmers for decades, but his government is supporting farmers with the Rythu Bandhu scheme which is a torch bearer for the country, Mr Rao said.

So far 6,062 families of farmers in the state have received `303 crore as insurance claim, he said.

He refuted allegations of the Congress that the Kanti Velugu initiative of his government has resulted in the loss of vision in a lot of people.

“I want to make it clear that we haven’t undertaken eye surgeries so far under the scheme; we will start doing it soon. It is completely wrong that some people lost their eye sights. So far, we conducted eye tests of 1.32 lakh people of the state.”

He said the Governor’s speech was great and did not agree with the Congress that it was bereft of details. “It is not a budget speech. The Governor’s speech reflects only the broader perspectives.”

He said that the state government was providing the double bedroom houses to the poor with 100 per cent subsidy.

Asserting the need of resolving the Podu Lands issue, the Chief Minister said that at the same time it was also necessary to protect forests and greenery, otherwise people will soon be forced to buy oxygen to breathe.

He warned that his government would curb smuggling of teakwood with an iron fist. Some 459 smugglers have been identified and will be booked under the PD Act, he said.

“In the coming years, we will provide water to 1.25 crore acres of land through various new irrigation projects which will help all farmers. We will also ensure that all damaged roads are repaired in the coming days as our priorities are irrigation, agriculture, welfare and roads.”

He alleged that the Central government had not responded to around 500 applications requesting more funds for the scheme despite the recommendation of Niti Aayog of sanctioning of `24,000 crore to the state for irrigation projects. He said, “There is no single rupee of the Centre in the KCR Kits scheme.”

He declared that his government will introduce vote on account budget in view of the general election this year.
