Healthcare: Safety kit for doctors & patients

By Nilotpal Mukherjee

The recent strike by junior doctors in Kolkata sparked off a nationwide protest by doctors about something very basic and fundamental: safety at the workplace. But the incident — amob beating up hapless doctors — is not just a Kolkata or West Bengal phenomenon. It’s a familiar one all over India. And it’s not a healthcare problem. It’s a law and order problem.

A thousand service delivery mechanisms are wrong in this country and don’t provide customer satisfaction. And, yet, those errant professionals aren’t beaten up by mobs. So, why doctors? The standard response is that doctors are ‘soft targets’. The dictionary definition of ‘soft target’ is ‘a person or thing that is relatively unprotected or vulnerable’.

Now, doctors, by and large, are as protected or unprotected as the rest of us. They are thought to be a regular part of the citizenry who don’t require extra protection. But that assumption also presupposes there is no unusual threat to doctors. This, as we can see from recent incidents, is not the case. Which brings us to vulnerability.

West Bengal chief minister Mamata Banerjee, in her meeting with the striking junior doctors earlier this week, mentioned that she treats doctors ‘at par with god’. Now, this is not an abstract random utterance from someone trying to assuage doctors and normalise a situation. This is how most of us have been made to understand the doctor-citizenry relationship while growing up. Doctors have the power to save lives, ergo, they resemble divinity.

Doctors never created this pedestal they were put on. Millions have been greatly benefited by them doing their job have put them there. Well, this pedestal now seems to be crumbling.

Doctors are not outside of society, they are part of it. And like people in any profession, you will find good ones, bad ones, lazy ones, hardworking ones, corrupt ones and honest ones. In this context, it must be underlined that medical malpractice and negligence is real. There are commissions being paid by diagnostic centres for tests done, pharma companies offering cash or freebies to doctors for prescribing their drugs, hospitals fudging bills, and many other such deplorable acts. These acts are nothing new. It is just that in today’s day of 24×7 media trying to outdo each other with their covfefe, these acts are getting reported far more frequently.

Communication — mostly, the lack of it — also adds to the situation. Doctors come from all sorts of backgrounds and needn’t always be good communicators. This is often construed as rudeness and arrogance by patients and their families. This is also a contributing factor to the recent level of intolerance against doctors. Maybe there is a case for introducing ‘soft skill’ classes in medical colleges.

Having said that, to generalise and categorise the entire healthcare fraternity as bad due to the acts of a few rotten apples is downright unfair. By and large, most doctors are sincere, hard-working, law-abiding, taxpaying citizens of this country. But thanks to media coverage, lumpen elements in society now think that beating up doctors is, well, not just kosher but fashionable. Most of the times, they do it to avoid paying hospital bills or doctor’s charges. This is not just wrong, but also illegal.

Medical malpractice as well as hooliganism are both issues of law and should be dealt with strictly. Law and order being a state subject, it is incumbent on each state government to crack down on malpractice, on one hand, as well as prevent attacks on doctors on the other. Vigilant and alert policing can prevent attacks and prompt action taken against miscreants leads to deterrence.

And when in a democracy the State fails to do so, a doctor has every right to protest. As citizens, we should demand the State to act to protect its citizens. The State must act decisively and the citizens must act lawfully and let doctors do the humane job of treating and caring for patients. They aren’t ‘next to god’, they are one of us and deserve to be treated equally. Nothing more, nothing less.

The writer is a Kolkata-based advertising professional

Facebook Twitter Linkedin Email Disclaimer Views expressed above are the author's own.

END OF ARTICLE
