Threat letter to Modi in Kerala sparks alert

(MENAFN- Gulf Times) An anonymous letter threatening to attack Prime Minister Narendra Modi has put all security agencies on their toes.

The letter was received at the office of a temple in Thrissur district of Kerala during PM Modi's visit last fortnight.

Highly placed sources in the agencies said the letter was received at the office of Guruvayur temple on June 7, close to the PM's visit to Kerala.

'The content of the letter initially caused panic as the prime minister was scheduled to visit the same temple. The temple authorities informed us about the letter and subsequently security was put on high alert, a senior official of Kerala police said.

As per a confidential report of the Intelligence Bureau, shared with Special Protection Group and police of relevant states, the 'threat message was written in Malayalam on a Rs500 note sealed in an envelop.

A few words in English were also written.

Intelligence agencies are continuing to investigate and trying to find out where the letter originated, a police officer added. For security reasons, the entire text of the threat message was not shared.

The prime minister had visited the Kerala temple before going to visit Maldives and Sri Lanka.

Modi had raised eyebrows by picking Kerala as his first stop to thank voters for the Bharatiya Janata Party's massive victory in the Lok Sabha elections. Kerala is the only majorly populated state where the BJP drew a blank in this election, as has been the party's fate forever in the state.

'The BJP drew blank in Kerala, you may ask why Modi selected Kerala for his first political speech. Kerala is as important as Varanasi, Modi had then said.

'We believe that elections have a place of their own but after elections the more important responsibility is towards the 130 crore citizens. Those who made us win are ours, those who did not make us win are also ours. Kerala is as much mine as is Varanasi, the premier had said.

According to intelligence sources, the prime minister's security arrangements are always as per the security blue book and all efforts are made to provide foolproof security cover to the executive head of the state. Any message relating to any sort of threat to the prime minister is evaluated by different agencies at various levels.

The SPG, which forms the inner cordon of PM's security, constantly co-ordinates with intelligence agencies, local and the state police. About raising the level of PM's security in wake of the recent threat, an official said, though people are concerned about the prime minister's security, such details cannot be shared with the media.

MENAFN2106201900670000ID1098669351
