Junior doctors call off strike

Govt. firm on retirement age; two demands conceded

Junior doctors working in all government teaching hospitals in the State have called off their week-long strike launched in protest against the government’s decision to increase the retirement age of professors in teaching hospitals from 58 years to 65 years.

The strike by junior doctors paralysed the medical services in all teaching hospitals, particularly in Osmania, Gandhi and Kakatiya general hospitals.

A delegation of Telangana Junior Doctors’ Association led by its chairman P.S. Vijayender held discussions with Minister for Health, Medical and Family Welfare Eatala Rajender for about three hours in two spells in the Secretariat on Saturday. The junior doctors body called off their strike although the State Government did not agree on withdrawing the increase in retirement age of medical teachers. However, the government agreed to two demands of junior doctors.

Speaking to media persons after the talks, Dr. Vijayender said they would resume duties both in out-patient and in-patient wings of teaching hospitals with immediate effect.

Contract basis

Further, the government had agreed to cancel the notification issued to fill the teaching and non-teaching posts on contract basis in Suryapet and Nalgonda government medical colleges on technical grounds and adjust the staff from other colleges and hospital till completion of regular recruitment. The Minister also announced writing to the Centre and the Medical Council of India to allow admissions in the two colleges, stating that the government would arrange the staff.

With regard to increase in the retirement age of medical professors, Dr. Vijayender claimed that the government had agreed to consult the JUDA while framing the guidelines on increasing the retirement age . The Minister stated that it was not possible to withdraw the ordinance issued already for the purpose, the JUDA chairman said. Further, the Minister agreed to fill the associate professor and professor posts in teaching hospitals with career advancement scheme.
