‘Schools should ensure water availability’

Action will be taken if they declare holidays due to shortage, says official

The School Education Department has warned of stringent action against private schools that close down due to non-availability of water.

Following media reports that a few schools had declared holiday or reduced their working hours due to water scarcity, the School Education Director said it was the responsibility of school administration to ensure water availability.

Highlighting that all types of private schools in the State were governed by regulations such as the Tamil Nadu Recognised Private Schools (Regulation) Rules or the Code of Regulations of Matriculation Schools, he said that while seeking approval to run schools, the respective managements had given undertakings that they had ensured basic amenities like toilets and water. It was therefore ‘reprehensible’ that certain school administrations were now declaring holidays or reducing working hours citing the unavailability of water, he said.

In a letter sent to all Chief Educational Officers (CEOs) and District Educational Officers (DEOs), the School Education Director said it was the duty of the school managements to take appropriate action to address water shortage, if any, in their institutions. He asked them to ensure that none of the schools were closing down due to unavailability of water.

Acknowledging that schools had provided an assurance that they will ensure basic amenities, Neelan Arasu, State coordinator, Tamil Nadu Private Schools’ Association, added, however, that it only applied during “ordinary circumstances”. “We are now facing an extraordinary situation, where the whole State, particularly the Chennai region, is reeling from acute water shortage. This is beyond the control of individual school managements,” he said.

“Moreover, the Right of Children to Free and Compulsory Education (RTE) Act places responsibility on local bodies as well to provision amenities like electricity and water to schools in their areas,” he argued. Stating that schools were earnestly trying to address the issue, he said, “We have asked all schools to train their housekeeping staff on conserving water. The managements and even parents are willing to spend more to bring water. Let the government tell us where to source the water from.”
