Finally, A Man Has Been Asked To Pay Rs 15k Fine For Bursting Diwali Crackers After 10 PM, Will Others Learn?

In what could be the first-ever trial and conviction for bursting firecrackers in the open beyond the permitted hours in violation of the Supreme Court’s order, a Delhi court admonished and fined a man who ignored police instructions and continued with the fireworks on Diwali night last year.

Mayank Singh, was released on a bail bond of Rs 15,000 after due admonition.

BCCL

Policemen patrolling a Delhi neighborhood on November 7, 2018, saw Singh bursting crackers after 10 pm and reprimanded him for breaking the apex court order that set a 10 pm deadline for bursting crackers. When they returned to the same place after a while, the man was still at it. A case was later registered against him under Section 188 (disobedience to order duly promulgated by public servant) of the IPC.

The order passed by additional chief metropolitan magistrate Jitendra Singh is perhaps the first-ever conviction, though several such cases were registered by police across India. In Delhi alone, over 550 cases were registered and more than 300 people were arrested on Diwali night last year.

BCCL

According to the deposition given in court, sub-inspector Khajan Singh said he was on night duty along with a police constable. On their patrol, they saw Singh bursting firecrackers after the deadline. The cops warned him that it was a violation of the Supreme Court order. But to their surprise, he continued to burst crackers and was apprehended.

Singh admitted the allegations against him but denied knowing there was a Supreme Court-ordered cut-off hour.

On October 23, 2018, SC had said that bursting of firecrackers would be allowed till 10 pm on Diwali and between 11.45pm and 12.30am for New Year and Christmas. The bench said the order would be applicable pan India and people would be liable to face contempt for not complying with its directions.

BCCL

The accused did not present any evidence in his defence and the prosecution argued that the allegation was proved beyond reasonable doubt. The court said the primary burden of proof for proving the offences in a criminal trial rested on the prosecution and that it never shifted to the accused.

Judge Singh further said that the police official, who was witness number 1, tried to restrain the accused from bursting firecrackers. “The fact that the convict is facing trial for bursting the firecrackers, the ends of justice will be met if the convict is admonished,” the court noted, referring to Section 3 of The Probation of Offenders Act, 1958.

The provision allows a court to release certain offenders after admonition.
