Airlines face a week of scams

SINGAPORE, 21 January 2019: Singapore Airlines warned it is customers against the ongoing threat of falling victim to websites that imitate an airline website to scam would-be passengers.

Last week, a scam was going the rounds in Singapore promising free air tickets on Singapore Airlines.

In a Facebook post, SIA said the fake website would ask users for their personal data. Phishing sites clone an airline’s homepage and dupe browsers into parting with confidential data.

In its Facebook post SQ said it “reported the site asking that it be taken down and would like to advise customers to exercise discretion when revealing personal data to unverified sources.”

“These websites, emails and calls should be verified if in doubt… send us details on our social media channels or via this link http://singaporeair.com/en_UK/feedback-enquiry/,” statement read.

SIA also advised customers to be wary of all social media posts and phishing websites that bear similarities to the airline official website.

This is not the first time the airline has been the target of phishing scams to gain access to personal data.

In 2017, a message saying that Singapore Airlines was giving away free first class tickets for its 45th anniversary. The scam made the rounds on WhatsApp, days after the airline launched its new first class suites.

There was another example of scammers pretending to be the airline employees, who called and emailed members of the public to phish for personal information.

In another scam in 2017, emails claiming that SIA was giving away free tickets in celebration of its 70th anniversary made the rounds, prompting the airline to release an advisory.

Last week, Lion Air Group said advertisements were placed in an Indian newspaper announcing a fake employment drive that offered walk-in interviews for applicants who were asked to provide security deposit. The airline does not fly to India.

To top off news on airline specific scams last week, on Friday AirAsia said it was aware of misleading sponsored content on social media that AirAsia Group CEO Tony Fernandes had launched a new financial technology platform called Crypto Revolt.

“Members of the public are advised to disregard such hoax content, and to refer to AirAsia’s official social media channels for the latest company news,” the airline statement read.
