Deadline for high-security registration plates in State

The Transport Commissioner has put on notice automobile dealers of all classes of vehicles to affix the tamper-proof high-security registration plates (HSRP) by June 26 to over one-lakh vehicles sold by them in the State since April 1 this year.

State Transport Commissioner Sudhesh Kumar’s directive came in the wake of some dealers failing to adhere to the Ministry of Road Transport and Highways (MoRTH) order to affix the HSRP within 24 hours of allocation of the registration number by the Regional Transport Officers (RTOs).

Over one-lakh registration certificates (RCs) are pending across the State as the dealers have not uploaded the details to the pan-India application Vahan for vehicle registration.

As the dealers had not uploaded the details after issuing the HSRP, the MVD officials cannot take printouts of the RCs.

Apathy by dealers

The laxity on the part of automobile dealers and manufacturers to adhere to the rules that came into force on April 1 and the delay on the part of the vendors to make available the HSRP have resulted in the backlog.

As per rule, automobile manufacturers will have to provide the “security licence plate, including the third registration mark,” to their approved dealers, who will place a mark of registration on such plates and affix them on all new vehicles.

The HSRP has to be affixed in all motor vehicles defined under Section 2(28) of the Motor Vehicles Act, 1988, and as per the prescribed standards notified by the Union government in 2018.

Only few dealers had come up with the facilities for issuing HSRP.

Clear backlog

The automobile dealers have been asked to clear the backlog by June 26 as it is affecting the services and reputation of the MVD.

“No fresh application for registration of motor vehicle will be accepted from June 27 by the MVD if the backlog is not cleared by the dealers,” the State Transport Commissioner said in a directive to RTOs.

The RTOs have been asked to suspend the Trade Certificate and take stern action against dealers who do not make arrangements to instal the requisite infrastructure with support from the automobile manufacturers.

Sales to be hit

Once the certificate is suspended by the RTO, the dealers will not be able to sell the vehicle.

The high-security registration plates are being insisted only for vehicles manufactured from April 1, 2019. Existing vehicles will have to go for the HSRP only if old plates have been surrendered or destroyed.
