President or not, Congress needs Rahul Gandhi and family, says Mani Shankar Aiyar

Congress leader Mani Shankar Aiyar | Photo Credit: PTI

New Delhi: As Congress struggles to move forward with Rahul Gandhi reportedly firm on his decision to step down from the post of party president, senior Congress leader Mani Shankar Aiyar has said that the Gandhi family must remain active within the organisation even if a 'non-Gandhi' heads the party.

"It would be best that Rahul remains party chief, but at the same time, his own wishes must also be respected. I am sure we can survive if we have to without a Nehru-Gandhi as the titular head of the party, provided the Nehru-Gandhis remain active in the party and can help resolve a crisis in case serious differences arise," Aiyar told PTI.

Aiyar accepted the unconfirmed reports that Rahul has given a month to the party leaders to come up with a replacement but asserted that everyone should wait for the 'deadline' to know if Rahul stays on as the party president or a replacement is actually found.

On being asked about his own stand over the matter, the senior Congress leader cautioned the party from getting trapped into a BJP plot. "I know it is the objective of the BJP to have a Gandhi-mukt Congress so as to have a Congress-mukt Bharat. I don't think we should be falling into the trap of thinking that they have discovered something that we are not able to discover," Aiyar said.

He further cited several examples when a non-Gandhi was appointed as the party president - UN Dhebar, Brahmananda Reddy, PV Narasimha Rao, Sitaram Kesri, Devakanta Barua, and several others.

On the Lok Sabha drubbing, Aiyar asserted that the Grand Old Party got its arithmetic wrong in the polls when it came to forging alliances. On the party's plan to take on the Modi-Shah juggernaut, Shah said, "Whatever our differences and wherever we are dominant, the one thing that unites us is a belief in a secular India which is being challenged by this alternative idea that is being propagated by the other side and now with much more force than ever because they have political power."

"A grand alliance of all like-minded parties, not necessarily under Congress leadership, but as a result of a Congress initiative, could be the answer to the challenge," he added.
