IMA Jewels scam accused Mansoor Khan vows to expose big politicians after returning to India

IMA founder-director Mansoor Khan I Source: Youtube | Photo Credit: YouTube

New Delhi/Bengaluru: The ‘missing’ founder-director of the controversial Bengaluru-based I Monetary Advisory (IMA), Mansoor Khan, on Sunday, said he wants to return to India. In an 18-minute video uploaded on YouTube today (June 23), Khan said he will reveal the name of corrupt politicians and officers who took bribes from him.

The proprietor of the Islamic banking and halal investment firm fled India on June 8 after his company ran into financial trouble. Khan, who is also the main accused in the Rs 700-crore scandal involving his company, demanded a probe by the Central Bureau of Investigation (CBI) in the video statement.

Khan said he had to flee India for the safety of his family and tried returning on June 14 but was ‘off-boarded’ after being told that he could not leave the country. In the video statement, he refused to reveal his current location citing a threat to his life.

“There are big people behind the whole fiasco of my company and if I reveal their names they will find my family and kill them,” he said. In the first video revealed after he fled India, Khan named several people for running a smear campaign against him.

He also requested city police commissioner Alok Kumar to help him return to India.

In audio clips released earlier, he threatened to commit suicide stating he is tired of bribing politicians and bureaucrats. Khan alleged that Congress leader and Shivajinagar MLA Roshan Baig took Rs 400 crore from him and refused to return it.

Baig, however, denied having any financial dealings with IMA and reportedly said that the audio clip was a conspiracy hatched by those with Congress to defame him.

Khan also claimed that he is under threat from other politicians and government officials who took money from him.

Numerous investors, mostly members of a minority community, filed complaints that they had been defrauded of their hard-earned money after being promised high return’s by IMA.

The Enforcement Directorate (ED), on Thursday, issued summon for Khan ordering him to appear before it on June 24. He is accused of running a ponzi scam worth several crores in Karnataka. His company IMA Jewels has over 25,000 complaints registered against it by people who invested in the company.

IMA promised unrealistic returns of 14-18% per month on investments and reportedly collected Rs 2,000 crore as a result.

As per the IMA group’s website, its business interests range from “Bullion Trading, Educational Academies offering Pre-Primary to Higher Secondary Education, Healthcare Services and a Multispeciality Hospital, Hypermarkets & Supermarkets, Infrastructure & Real Estate Development, Printing & Publishing and Retail Sales of Gold, Silver, Diamond & Platinum Jewellery”.
