Ahead of Lok Sabha polls, Jat leaders reiterate quota demand, say ‘will support BSP if BJP fails to deliver'

Jat leaders said that Mayawati was the only UP leader who had condemned government action against Jats during the 2016 agitation in Haryana (Representative image) | Photo Credit: BCCL

New Delhi: Ahead of the Lok Sabha elections, leaders of Jat community from across the country on Sunday announced that they would vote against the Bharatiya Janata Party (BJP) in the upcoming polls if their demands for reservation were not met. Leaders from different states including from Uttar Pradesh, Rajasthan, Haryana, Delhi and Madhya Pradesh alleged that they had been cheated by the Centre which had not accepted their demands for quota.

They claimed that the Narendra Modi government had instead given 10 per cent reservation to forward castes “within seven days”, Indian Express reported. The Jat leaders announced that they would lend support to Bahujan Samaj Party (BSP) chief Mayawati in the Lok Sabha elections in Uttar Pradesh as she was the “only UP leader who had supported reservation for Jats” and had also condemned the government’s action against Jats during the 2016 agitation in Haryana.

Three years ago, the Jat agitation in Haryana for a reservation had become marred with violence, resulting in the death of at least 30 people.

The Jat leaders gathered under the banner of All India Jat Arakshan Bachao Maha Andolan (AIJABMA) on Sunday. Speaking about the gathering of the Jat leaders, Dharamveer Chaudhary, Chief Coordinator of AIJABM at a press conference in Delhi slammed the Modi government over its failure to implement reservation for Jats in government jobs. Jat leaders threaten to restart quota agitation, slam Haryana government for 'misguiding' court

Chaudhary said, “The UPA government had given us a reservation in central jobs. But when it was challenged in the Supreme Court, the present NDA government deliberately did not argue our case well and the government order was quashed. Since then, the Narendra Modi government has just been giving us assurances. I warn the government that Jats won’t be manipulated anymore. We will campaign in 131 constituencies where Jats have a significant population to defeat the BJP.”

He further said that the organisation had urged the community members to “welcome their MPs with shoes” because they had not raised the issue of Jat quota in the Parliament. Chaudhary claimed that a committee set up by the Centre for Jat reservation, under the leadership of BJP leader M Venkaiah Naidu, had not held a single meeting, the daily reported.

The Jat leaders also recalled several meetings held with PM Narendra Modi and BJP President Amit Shah over the issue, however, those did not yield the desired results, they said. Chaudhary said, “The Prime Minister met us on March 26, 2015, at his residence and said you are a brave community and we will give you a reservation in a proper way. Ahead of the UP polls, Amit Shah said we will give you reservation and we voted for BJP. But BJP did not walk the talk.”

He added that the Jats would cast their vote to anyone who supported their demands. He said, “Our appeal is to vote for those who talk about our rights. In UP, Mayawati has supported our cause and said Jats must get a reservation. She had also attacked the government for taking brutal action against agitators in Haryana.”

Notably, several Jats at the meeting slammed both the BJP as well as the Congress for not addressing the Jat community’s concerns, the daily reported.

Times Network - India's Leading Broadcasting Network, uniquely offering English Entertainment, best in class News channels & Bollywood Masala, available at a Value pack (7 channels) of Rs 13/- per month.

Please contact your cable/DTH service provider now and ensure that your TV viewing experience is complete. To know more click here.
