Congress for retaining alliance with DMK for local body polls

Plans to seek action against cadre speaking out of turn

A day after former DMK Minister K.N. Nehru said the party should fight the local body polls without the Congress, Tamil Nadu Congress Committee (TNCC) president K.S. Alagiri on Sunday insisted that the ties between the two parties were intact and cannot be snapped.

The TNCC is planning to recommend that the party high command take action against some functionaries who are speaking out of turn on the issue of electoral ties.

Thiagarajan’s remark

The TNCC leadership was of the view that Mr. Nehru’s comments on Saturday were possibly triggered by Congress South Chennai district president Karate R. Thiagarajan’s suggestion during a meeting last week that the Congress must explore the possibility of fighting the civic polls alone, at least in a few places.

Mr. Alagiri told The Hindu that there were some concerns about the sudden turn of events.

“I heard Mr. Nehru make those comments, but he later said it was his personal opinion. See, ultimately the leadership of the parties will decide and overcome this issue,” he said. “I understand Karate Thiagarajan gave some byte to some media outlet, which has led to the current situation,” Mr. Alagiri added.

‘Alliance intact’

On Friday, Mr. Alagiri said the local body polls would be fought as part of the alliance. He issued a statement on Sunday evening, stating that the DMK-Congress alliance was intact.

“It is an alliance formed by [DMK president] Mr. Stalin and [Congress president] Rahul Gandhi. It cannot be called off by anyone,” he said.

Disciplinary action would be taken against anyone who speaks to the media out of turn with their suggestions and ideas that should normally be conveyed either in person or through letters to the party leadership, he added.

Sources in the Congress indicated that the leadership was considering recommending action against Mr. Thiagarajan.

‘Rein in cadre’

Meanwhile, TNCC functionary Raviraj, known to be close to Mr. Thiagarajan, said in a video message that Mr. Stalin should rein in his party cadre as the Lok Sabha victory was made possible because there was an anti-Modi wave in Tamil Nadu.

“If the DMK alone was responsible for the Lok Sabha victory, they should have won all the bypolls in 22 Assembly constituencies as well,” he said.

It was important for the cadre of the DMK to cooperate and work together as it was necessary to keep anti-secular forces away from the State, Mr. Raviraj added.
