Stand by party cadres: Naidu

‘TDP will continue to fight for the rights of the State’

TDP national president and former Chief Minister N. Chandrababu Naidu has asserted that the State’s interests are above everything for the party.

“The TDP will always work for the people of the State and its development. Whether in power or out of power, the TDP will continue to fight for the rights of the State,” Mr. Naidu said during a teleconference with the party leaders on Sunday.

Mr. Naidu asked the party leaders to support the cadres who were being attacked by the YSRCP workers.

The leaders should visit the families of the workers who were attacked by the YSRCP cadres and instil confidence in them that the party would come to their rescue, he advised.

The party would always stand by the cadres during difficult times. Also, concerted and sustained efforts to strike a chord with the people were required, he asserted. Denying allegations of corruption in the construction of Polavaram, capital city Amaravati and other projects, Mr. Naidu said there was no truth in it. The YSRCP was resorting to baseless allegations against the TDP, and any attempt to tarnish the party’s image would boomerang, he said.

The TDP leaders took a dig at the Ministers and the YSRCP leaders who were making allegations against the TDP government and leaders.

Reacting to the comments of Municipal Administration Minister Botsha Satyanarayana and others, the TDP leaders said the State government changed its stand on the Polavaram project several times during the last one month.

In Delhi, the YSRCP leaders said the Central government would take up the works and in Vijayawada, they claimed that the government would construct the project, the TDP leaders observed.

“The leaders who had been highly critical of YSRCP president and Chief Minister Y.S. Jagan Mohan Reddy were now his Cabinet Ministers. People still remember Mr. Satyanarayana’s allegations against Mr. Jagan. They speak as if they are holy cows now. The Praja Vedika was constructed with public money. Mr. Naidu wrote a letter only to use it as a venue to receive petitions from the people. Without taking any decision on the letter, the government took possession of the venue,” the leaders said. Leaders Yanamala Ramakrishnudu, K. Srinivasulu, K. Atchannaidu, P. Anuradhaa, Varla Ramaiah, Janardhan, D. Avinash attended.
