Dombivali locals complain of putrid smell from nullahs

The residents

Maharashtra Navnirman Sena

industries

Maharashtra Pollution Control Board

of Gandhi Nagar, Nandeli, Sagarli, Sagav and MIDC in Dombivali have complained of breathing problems due to a putrid smell coming from the nullahs. The water in these drains has turned green in the last couple of days.The locals have blamed M a h a r a s h t r a I n d u s t r i a l Development Corporation (MIDC) officials for not monitoring the effluent system of the industrial units.Rajesh Kadam,chief of Dombivali, told Mumbai Mirror, “The ministers had last visited the MIDC area in connection with the 2016 blast in the Probace enterprise company, which claimed 12 lives and left over 100 injured. Back then, they had given lots of assurances, but nothing has changed on the ground. If the smell is not going away, we will have to start another protest like last time,” Kadam added.The MIDC Dombivali divisional engineer has recently issued a notice to over 450 industrial units warning them about the problems in effluent disposal.“It is observed that the collection lines are periodically choked due to fibre materials, cotton materials, etc let out by the, causing MIDC chamber gates to overflow. Theflying squads are actively monitoring the system and initiating legal action on defaulter industries. To avoid unpleasant action from the authorities, it is requested to let out effluents from your unit by means of pumps only.”Raju Nalawade of Dombivali welfare association slammed the tokenism of issuing notices. “MIDC officials in Dombivali think that once they issue these notices their role is over and legally they are in a safe zone in case any accident happens. Pollution is a serious problem here and we citizens are bringing it up every day. Leaders have no time to address our issues.”The recommendations of the report after a blast in the Probace enterprise have not been implemented. There are smaller fire incidents happening in the industrial area, triggering safety concerns.
