Mumbai monsoon 2019: City likely to receive rains ‘by June 25’; slowest onset of monsoon in 10 years

Monsoon expected to arrive in Mumbai by June 25 ( File image) | Photo Credit: ANI

Mumbai: After a delay of almost a fortnight, monsoon is finally expected to arrive in Mumbai by June 25, bringing a much-needed respite for the Mumbaikars who have been dealing with hot and humid conditions for the past couple of weeks.

According to the private weather forecaster Skymet Weather, monsoon is most likely to make an onset in Mumbai by June 25, owing to the presence of various weather systems "which has revived the Monsoon surge."

Normally, monsoon arrives in Mumbai by June 10. However, this year has marked the slowest arrival of monsoon in the capital city of Maharashtra in a decade, the India Meteorological Department (IMD) said.

Speaking to the Times of India, Shubhangi Bhute, a scientist at IMD, said, "There are indications of rain over Mumbai after June 25. We may get rain earlier, but it needs to rain continuously for two days for us to declare the onset."

While the onset date for monsoons in the city was June 9 in 2018 and June 12 in 2017, the rains had reached Mumbai on June 24 in 2009.

Meanwhile, Skymet Weather predicted that rains in Mumbai could increase Monday onwards and that light to moderate showers can take place the metropolis.

The weatherman at the private forecaster warned that Mumbai rains are unlikely to have a “thumping start”, which is usually the norm during the onset of monsoon in Mumbai.

Also read: Advancement of southwest monsoon to create 'favourable' weather conditions: IMD

“However, the chances of some good moderate showers cannot be ruled out,” Skymet Weather said in its press release.

The Northern Limit of Monsoon (NLM) was currently passing through Ratnagiri, Ahmednagar, Aurangabad, Nagpur, Pendra, Varanasi and Bahraich, it added.

On Sunday, the minimum temperature recorded in Mumbai was 28.6 degrees Celsius, while the maximum temperature recorded was 33.6 degrees Celsius. The relative humidity recorded at 5:30 pm on Sunday was 65 per cent, as per the IMD. However, no rainfall took place yesterday.

Till now, the city has received 165 mm rainfall, which spells a deficit of 167 mm. In contrast, by June 22 last year, total rainfall of 408 mm had been recorded.

On the other hand, Ratnagiri, Kolhapur, Sangli, Ahmednagar and Aurangabad received good rainfall on Sunday.
