Notorious gangster Bheja, aides held in Chandigarh

editorial@tribune.com

Tribune News Service

Jalandhar, June 23

Notorious gangster Gurbhej Singh Bheja, who had fled from hospital where he was taken from the Kapurthala Central Jail on May 7, was arrested along with his three accomplices from Hallo Majra last night.

He was involved in 14 cases, including that of bid to murder, robbery, snatchings etc.

In a joint operation, the Kapurthala and Chandigarh police nabbed Gurbhej Singh and his aides from a PG accommodation in a congested Hallo Majra locality in Chandigarh where he and his gang members were putting up since May.

Addressing a press conference here today, Kapurthala SSP Satinder Singh said Gurbhej Singh hailed from Patti Beniwal at Sultanwind in Amritsar district. He has been arrested along with his aides Vinod Kumar, alias Rangila, of Amritsar cantonment, and Vishal Singh and Manpreet Kaur, alias Dolly, of Sultanwind.

A 7.6 mm pistol and six live rounds, two mobile phones and a wifi device have been recovered from them. After he fled from police custody in May, Gurbhej had fired at the house of Lalla Pehlwan gang’s chief and he was now planning to attack him.

A case has been filed against Bheja and his aides under sections 307, 353, 186, 224, 225, 34, 379B IPC at Kapurthala city police station. Two of those who facilitated his escape were nabbed on May 7, while two more are yet to be arrested.

The police said Gurbhej Singh had planned his escape with brother-in-law Sarwan Singh alias Sunny (brother of co-accused Dolly) and Vinod Kumar alias Rangeela from Civil Hospital, Kapurthala, during a medical check-up.

His earlier escape bid from the Civil Hospital 15 days before that was foiled by the police. Despite that he was successful in fleeing on May 7. His gang members Sunny, Akashdeep, Yadvinder Singh, alias Yadi Mahal, Manpreet Singh alias Rohit and Bharat Chauhan, alias Mitthu, were behind the escape. Mintu and Sunny had fired shots at cops and spread panic at the hospital before freeing him.

Attempted to kill rival
