Six men hold girl, 16, captive and gang-rape her for a week in latest case to shock India

A 16-year-old girl was held captive and raped by six men and boys for five days in the latest case to spark national outrage in India.

The victim was found in shock at the bus station in Ongole, in Prakasam district, on Saturday night.

Leaders of India's Andhra Pradesh state have pledged firm action.

'This is a heinous crime and we will take deterrent steps to ensure such incidents did not recur,' Andhra Pradesh state Home Minister Mekathoti Sucharitha said.

Andhra Pradesh state Home Minister Mekathoti Sucharitha condemned the shocking crime and

State legislator for Ongole and Andhra Pradesh Energy Minister Balineni Srinivasa Reddy also condemned the incident.

Police said seven suspects had been arrested, four of them engineering students and, shockingly, three of them minors.

Prakasam District Superintendent of Police Siddharth Kaushal told media on Sunday that one of the suspects had gaine dthe girl's trust while she was waiting for her friend at the station on June 17.

Prakasam District Superintendent of Police Siddharth Kaushal

The man lied, saying that he knew her friend, and took her to his room where he allegedly raped her.

The girl was kept captive for a week, during which five of the man's friends also raped her.

The Times of India reported that the girl was dumped at the bus station by her abductor, who made dire threats against her reporting the crime to the police.

But the Press Trust of India reported that she escaped her captors and made her own way back to the station.

There she was noticed by a security guard who called the police.

Officers found the girl in shock, but after counselling she was able to give them an account of her horrific ordeal.

Kausdshal said a case had been opened under the Protection of Children from Sexual Offences (POCSO) Act, and vowed that the culprits would be brought to justice.

Outrage over rape cases across India has prompted mass protests and even lynchings of suspects in recent years.

April 17 2018 saw nationwide protests after an eight-year-old Muslim girl was raped and murdered in Kashmir state.

That came a weekafter Kuldeep Singh Sengar, a member of the Uttar Pradesh state legislative assembly for the ruling BJP party, was charged with raping a 16-year-old girl in 2017.

On June 3 this year a 39-year-old man was fatally beaten by a mob in Jalandhar, Punjab state, for allegedly raping his neighbour's 11-year-old daughter.
