Modi government has compliment addiction: Adhir Ranjan Chowdhury

New Delhi [India], Jun 24 (ANI): Leader of Congress in Lok Sabha Adhir Ranjan Chowdhury targeted the Narendra Modi government on Monday saying it resorts to "manipulation" and has "compliment addiction", and accused BJP members of being more concerned about praising Prime Minister Narendra Modi than about welfare of people.

Participating in the debate on the motion of thanks to the President's Address, Chowdhury said BJP leaders had made allegations against top Congress leaders Sonia Gandhi and Rahul Gandhi during the Lok Sabha elections and challenged the government to arrest them.

"Those whom you labelled thieves, why are they not in jail...Why is Sonia Gandhi out, why is Rahul Gandhi out? We have the courage to fight," he said.

BJP leaders had alleged during the Lok Sabha election campaign said the Congress leadership was out on bail with regards to alleged corruption charges.

Chowdhury said BJP had raked up controversies like 2G spectrum sale and coal scam but was not raising them now because the issues have lost traction among people.

He said Modi was "a big salesman" and BJP succeeded in the Lok Sabha elections because it was successful in selling its "product" while the Congress could not.

Chowdhury accused the Modi government of "political plagiarism" saying it had renamed over 20 schemes of Congress. "They have compliment addiction by manipulation," he said.

He went on to say that though Congress may have grown weak in terms of numbers, it will never stop fighting for common people.

The Congress leader said BJP members "worship" the Prime Minister as he delivers them electoral victories and alleged they were not concerned about the problems of people. He said they had not spoken about the drought situation in some parts of the country as also deaths in Bihar due to Encephalitis.

Chowdhury spoke in detail about the work done by the Congress governments and said it had brought about the green revolution, white revolution, initiated a slew of social revolution measures and had initiated the work in making the country self-reliant in defence by forming DRDO (ANI).


