Struggling with water scarcity, Hisar village asks for merger with Rajasthan

The people of the villages from Balawas, Kaparo and Basara say they are fed up of false promises. | Photo Credit: Getty Images

Hisar: In an unusual development, residents of a village in Haryana's Hisar district have decided to petition Rajasthan government for the merger of their village with the state after continuously struggling with water scarcity.

The people of the villages from Balawas, Kaparo and Basara say they are fed up of false promises of a solution to their drinking water woes. However, the residents of Basara have run out of hope from the Haryana authorities to solve their water issue and wanted their village, which lies along the border with Rajasthan, to be merged with the state.

According to a report in Times of India, the resident of another village - Balawas - have been continuously protesting for over two months seeking a resolution to their water crisis, but to no avail. The residents of the village have reportedly boycotted voting in Lok Sabha polls and now they are threatening to boycott the upcoming Haryana Assembly polls as well.

The story is the same in Kaparo village where recently the villagers reportedly attacked elected panchayat member - Rajbala - after a meeting with her failed to yield any result. However, the panchayat member did not complain to police saying the grudges of the people over water issues are legitimate.

"The village was living with a water supply system as old as 1971. The population in the village has increased manifold since and there is not enough water in the village. In 2017, Chief Minister Manohar Lal Khattar had announced a second waterworks project for the village, but work hasn’t started yet," the report quoted Sarpanch Shailendra as saying.

Bhagat Ram from Basara village said they have decided to approach Rajasthan Chief Minister Ashok Gehlot asking him either to adopt their village or help it merge with his state.

"An area within a state can't be merged with another unless Parliament takes up the matter. If Rajasthan government gives it approval then it would be easier for people of Basara village to press for their demand," said advocate Naveen Rajli.
