China ties not at India's expense: UK Parliament report urges to spur engagement with rising India

PM Narendra Modi in UK | Photo Credit: PTI

New Delhi: A UK Parliament report has warned that the country is falling behind in the race to engage with India and failing to make the most of its extensive ties with New Delhi. The report titled ‘Building Bridges: Reawakening UK-India ties’ warns that the UK needs to readjust its ties to India’s “enhanced influence and power”.

“One change should be enhancing our relationship with India: as a practical and symbolic start to resetting that relationship, we encourage the Foreign Secretary to visit India as soon as possible and certainly before the end of 2019,” the report that released on Sunday noted.

The parliamentary report was released on first-ever India Day in the House of Parliament to mark the launch of UK-India Week 2019. It notes that London needs to do more to maximise the potential of its relationship with New Delhi in various areas such as trade, investment and movement of people, security and defence.

On Visa and access to the UK for Indians

It criticises UK Home Office’s single-minded objective of reducing net migration and calls for making it easier for Indian entrepreneurs, businesses, tech workers, tourists and students, “who offer clear benefits to the UK and often plan only a short-term stay”.

“As India has boomed over the last two decades, the UK has fallen behind other countries in its share of India’s fast-growing trade with the world. This is an expensive missed opportunity,” it says.

On visa issue, it notes that India which shares similar values and history with the UK has to face tougher norms than an autocracy like China.

“Something has gone wrong if it is more difficult for citizens of a strategically important democracy that shares our values, language, and history to visit or study in the UK than those of an autocracy. The Government told us that it was not “picking winners” in Asia, but its policies on the movement of people sometimes suggest otherwise”.

On defence and China threat

On the security and defence front, the report says that UK and India’s interests converge in the Indian Ocean region and called for increased engagement.

“The UK and India’s shared interest in promoting rules-based order in the in the Indo-Pacific region makes India an important partner in this initiative. The UK cannot have a successful Indo-Pacific strategy without a flourishing strategic relationship with India. Such a relationship has not yet been built,” it added.

It highlighted the shared world-view and interests of the two nations in favour of a rules-based international order and warned of having a relationship with China at the expense of India.

“The UK’s efforts to build ties with China, and engage with Belt and Road, should not be pursued at the expense of its relationship with India. India has been clear about its commitment to the rules-based order, while China’s position is mixed, particularly around the promotion of free societies. While the relationship with Beijing is undoubtedly important, the depth of shared values between the UK and India make New Delhi a vital strategic partner for the future.

The FCO (Foreign and Commonwealth Office) should take the lead in ensuring that stronger economic ties with China do not harm the political relationship with India.

“The UK’s efforts to build ties with China, and engage with Belt and Road, should not be pursued at the expense of its relationship with India. India has been clear about its commitment to the rules-based order, while China’s position is mixed, particularly around the promotion of free societies. While the relationship with Beijing is undoubtedly important, the depth of shared values between the UK and India make New Delhi a vital strategic partner for the future.”










