Your favourite Instagrammer may be a Pakistani spy: Indian Army cautions soldiers

Army Intelligence has issued advisory to its personnel against an Instagram profile 'Oyesomya'. (Photo: ANI)

The Indian Army has cautioned its soldiers against an Instagram and a Facebook profile, saying that it could be that of a Pakistani spy, trying to gather classified information.

It has said that social media profiles "Oyesoumya" on Instagram and "Gujjar Soumya" on Facebook have come to the notice of the Indian Army for their "duplicitous credentials".

In an advisory, it said that the profiles could be of a spy trying to "target Army officers and special forces' troops" and obtain classified information from them.

The Indian Army said that there is a possibility that the profile is being used by agencies to create inroads into the social media accounts of gullible personnel to gain information of classified nature.

"She [Gujjar Soumya] claims to be the sister of late Captain Pawan Kumar. She claims to be currently studying as a research scholar in IIT Bombay and that she has cleared IIT JEE 2016 and NTSE 2014," the advisory read.

It added: "It is necessary that the envt may be sensitised against any contact with the profile and threats pertaining to the same as there is a likelihood that the profile being used by inimical agencies to create inroads into the social media accounts of gullible services persons to gain information of classified nature."

A massive number of "honey trapping" cases have hit the Indian Army, prompting it to launch an unprecedented nationwide crackdown.

Recently, a 26-year-old Army clerk was arrested in Madhya Pradesh after he was allegedly found to be honey-trapped by Pakistan agencies on social media and passing information to them.

Sources told India Today TV that the Army clerk, who was posted in an infantry battalion in Madhya Pradesh's Mhow, came in touch with a Pakistan-based Facebook profile of a woman who claimed to be an international journalist.
