Our dream is not to rise, our aim is to stay rooted: PM Modi hits out at Congress

Our dream is not to rise, our aim is to stay rooted: PM Modi hits out at Congress (Image: LSTV)

In his first Parliament speech after 17th Lok Sabha session started, PM Modi was in full form, patting the BJP's back for its resounding 2019 Lok Sabha election mandate and hitting out at opponents in his trademark style.

While replying to the 'Motion Of Thanks On the President's Address' in the Lok Sabha, PM Modi attributed the BJP's victory in the 2019 Lok Sabha elections to its ground connect, something he said the Congress no longer could boast of.

Taking a jibe at the Congress, PM Modi said, "Congratulations on the heights you have reached. You rose so high that you stopped seeing the ground reality."

In contrast is the BJP, who PM Modi claimed, "is not competing to reach new heights, but is firmly rooted in extending its ground reach".

PM Modi's remarks were in response to Congress leader Adhir Ranjan Chowdhury's speech in the Lok Sabha the day before. Adhir Ranjan Chowdhury had praised the Congress for the development of the country.

"Congress is the soul of the nation. Congress is synonymous with India... For us, the country is ahead of the party... Although we have 52 members in the House, we will continue to fight for the common man," Adhir Ranjan Chowdhury had said.

Continuing his attack on Adhir Ranjan Chowdhury's speech, PM Modi said, "Some present in this house said our achievements cannot be diminished. We do not make such mistakes."

"We do not believe in reducing someone else's accomplishments. We believe in furthering our progress, for which we are devoting our lives," added PM Modi.

PM Modi also said the BJP recognised the good work done by others, "There are some people who feel only a few names contributed to national progress. They only want to hear those few names and ignore the others. We think differently, we feel each and every citizen has worked for India's progress," he said.
