IMA scam: How IMA, Roshan Baig played politics with Siasat and shut the Urdu daily in Bengaluru

Urdu daily newspaper

Bengaluru

Mohammed Mansoor Khan

I Monetary Advisory

Siasat

Roshan Baig

Siasat, an, abruptly stopped itsand Hubballi edition ever since it was confirmed that, the fugitive managing director of(IMA) had escaped from the country.The last edition ofwas printed on June 10. Sources said that the printing of the newspaper managed by Daanish Publications Private Limited, belonging to the family of former minister R, was stopped purportedly over pending dues to MNS Printers Private Limited, which was printing the all-colour Siasat. Ruman Baig, one of the sons of Roshan Baig, is still the printer of Siasat.Operating from IMA’s old office on Bowring Hospital Road, the Siasat office was seized by the Special Investigation Team probing the multi-crore scam.Sources in the Urdu media say that Mansoor was unofficially managing the newspaper from November 2017. He wanted to increase his clout within the community by making a foray into the media business and had evinced interest to sign a formal Memorandum of Understanding (MoU) sometime in April this year.Rehman Khan, former Union Minister and Chairman of Salar Publications Trust that publishes Salar daily said that after Mansoor took over Siasat, he effected several changes – increased the number of pages to 20, made it all-colour, came out with several attractive subscription schemes including free subscriptions for three months.The number of pages in the newspaper however dropped to 16 and then 12, as IMA’s troubles began a year ago. The June 10 edition had just 12 pages.Rehman Khan, who was named by Mansoor in his latest video, said that he met Mansoor through Baig. “He (Baig) had brought him to my residence soon after he took over Siasat.Probably, Mansoor was expecting us to go to him to stop competition, but Salar didn’t bother about the changes in Siasat,’’ said Rehman Khan, adding that he had openly opposed and was always suspicious about IMA’s activities.Mansoor was paying salaries which were above Urdu journalism industry standards, said a senior media professional tracking Urdu newspapers. An insider said that there were at least 70 editorial and non-editorial staff in Bengaluru and Hubballi offices.Soon after he took over, Mansoor shifted the Siasat office to a much bigger space while using the old Siasat office premises in Ganesh Towers on Infantry Road as the administrative office of Mulberry Green, the grocery line of IMA. This office has been locked by the SIT.A senior Urdu journalist, who didn’t wish to be named, said, that Siasat had almost become a mouthpiece of IMA.One of the staff in Siasat said that Mansoor was paying salaries to the entire staff of Siasat Daily, its vendors and printers. “We were getting salaries till March. In April, Mansoor said that this is the last salary that he is paying and asked us to get May salaries from Daanish Publications,’’ another employee said.In May, Mansoor agreed to pay only those on the rolls, not stringers or vendors, after several requests were made by the staff. “We requested him to pay our salary because of Ramzan and finally, it was paid,’’ said an employee. Salaries were paid through online transfer by IMA though the staff continued to be on Daanish Publications Pvt Ltd's rolls.Insiders in Siasat and those involved in IMA say that in April, Mansoor wanted to sign a MoU with Daanish Publications. Delhi based IMA Publishers Private Limited, an arm of the IMA floated by Mansoor wanted to take over, sources said.Mansoor sent a set of MoU papers through one of his staff to get signatures of Baig. The suspended Congress MLA, however, was furious at the MoU copy being sent through an employee and refused to sign, said a source.From then on, Mansoor lost interest and wanted to exit from Siasat, sources said.When BM reached out to Baig, he lost his cool when asked about the IMA-Siasat link. “How many times, should I clarify you? I already said it at the Press Club. Whatever, I have to say, I will inform the SIT or other official authorities,’’ he said before hanging up. Siasat, which literally means politics, is a Hyderabad based newspaper. In the late 1990’s Baig took a franchise of the brand and started operations in Bengaluru and subsequently in Hubballi.Both Rehman Khan and Congress leader Mohammed Obedualla Sharieff, Chief Editor, Pasban, an Urdu daily, said that they were named by Mansoor in his latest video as both were against IMA and were cautioning the community against it.Sharieff said that he had even written a letter to Mansoor in 2016 questioning the logic of high interests paid by IMA, besides publishing a news article on Income Tax raids on IMA in 2017.“It is nothing but a ponzi scam,” he said. Rehman Khan, a qualified CA, said that it was impossible to survive on such a business plan. “This was expected,” he said.
