Tamil Nadu govt most corrupt, failed to handle water crisis, says DMK in Lok Sabha

Tamil Nadu is facing drought from three years because of successive failure of north east monsoons. (Photo: Reuters)

The Dravida Munnetra Kazhagam (DMK) on Tuesday termed AIADMK government in Tamil Nadu as "most corrupt", accusing the government of failing to handle the water crisis in the state.

While speaking on the motion of thanks on the President's address, DMK member Dayanidhi Maran launched a scathing attack against the state government over the water crisis that the people are facing these days.

Maran also said that Tamil Nadu government was complacent and did not anticipate the water crisis, leaving the people to face hardships.

Tamil Nadu is reeling under an acute water crisis for the past several months after Chennai's Porur Lake, which is considered one of the main sources of water, reached its lowest level.

Upping the ante against the AIADMK government in Tamil Nadu for "inefficient handling" of the water scarcity in the state, DMK president M K Stalin on Monday led a massive protest in Chennai and lambasted Chief Minister K Palaniswami for attempting to downplay the crisis.

On Sunday, DMK leader Duraimurugan warned the Tamil Nadu government against taking water from Jolarpettai in Velore to Chennai. He said massive protests will break out in the district if such a move is approved.

Duraimurugan, who is the Katpadi MLA said, "If they start taking water from here (Vellore), then we will stage a massive protest here."

His comments came after Tamil Nadu Chief Minister Edappadi Palaniswami stated that the state government plans to bring 10 million litres of water per day (MLD) of water to Chennai by railway wagons for the next six months.

In one of the worst summers, taps have gone dry in most parts of Tamil Nadu, including Chennai city, affecting citizens and corporates alike.

Four major lakes of Chembarambakkam, Poondi, Red Hills and Cholavaram that supply water to the city are almost dry.

The major water bodies have dried up due to rainfall deficit in the past two years. This has also led to depletion of ground water levels.

Supporting a population of about 50 lakh, this sixth largest city in India needs 80 crore litres of water daily, but can provide only 52.5 crore - that too is reducing at a drastic pace.

Tamil Nadu is facing drought from three years because of successive failure of north east monsoons.

Chief Minister K Palaniswami on Friday said 10 million litres would be transported from Jolarpet in Vellore district by train to augment supply.

Chennai Metropolitan Water Supply and Sewerage Board has been allocated Rs 158.42 crore for water distribution here, Palaniswami said.

Other state agencies, including the Tamil Nadu Water Supply and Drainage Board, have been provided Rs 108.32 crore to ensure water supply in other parts of the state, he said.
