India, US agree to work together, find common ground

Laying the foundation for PM Modi's meeting with US President Donald Trump in Osaka, Japan on the sidelines of the 14th G20 Summit, US Secretary of State Mike Pompeo met PM Modi and External Affairs Minister S Jaishankar on Wednesday in Delhi.

PM Modi during his talks with secretary Pompeo, reiterated priorities his govt attaches to US and "outlined his vision for the strategic partnership in the new tenure of the government", according to an Indian govt release. Pompeo and Jaishankar had a frank discussion on a range of topics, From US-Iran tensions to S400 to trade issues to terror.

Terror was something both agreed on with EAM expressing India's appreciation for the "strong support" received from trump admin and zero tolernce for cross border terrorism. Pompeo said US, "will strengthen India's ability to fight terrorism" and New Delhi's ability to fight the scourge "should be second to none".

In the backdrop of current Tehran-Washington tension, EAM shared with Secretary Pompeo India's interest and concern like diaspora, regional security and trade. Pompeo called for the need to make sure straits of hormuz is open, and reiterated what US has been saying, that Iran is sponsoring terror.

On Indo Pacific, EAM saying the concept is "for something and not against somebody and that something is peace, security, stability, prosperity and rules". But Pompeo was much critical of China, saying countries who are part of Beijing's Belt and Road initiative has seen not "strings attached but shackles".

Contentious issues like trade and India's S400 with Russia also dominated the talks. During the press statements, Pompeo said, "never found an ally or partner you had rubs", but said, both can work together and "India is important friend" for US. Trump admin has been asking for more market access in Indian markets. EAM, "Hoping both sides will find common ground", said, "sign of mature relationship is that the ability to negotiate your way through".

On S400 deal, EAM made it clear to Washington, "we have many relationships with many countries....and many of them are some standing and they have a history". Explaining, "we will do what is in our national interest."
