Tata Tigor electric price in India starts at Rs 9.99 lakh and goes up to Rs 10.09 lakh (ex-showroom)

Available in two mid-spec variants - XM and XT - the Tigor EV is only on offer to fleet operators, for now.

Prices for Tata’s highly anticipated first all-electric vehicle, the Tigor EV, are finally known. Priced from Rs 9.99 lakh (and going up to Rs 10.09 lakh), the Tata Tigor EV is only available to fleet operators and not for private buyers, yet.

This ex-showroom price includes TCS (a 1 percent tax levied on cars that cost above Rs 10 lakh) and incentives provided by the Indian government’s FAME II scheme (which amounts to Rs 1.62 lakh). This means that without breaks offered by the government scheme for electric vehicles, the Tigor EV costs between Rs 11.61-11.71 lakh. Including taxes and incentives, the Tigor EV’s price is about Rs 4 lakh more than the equivalent petrol Tigor variant.

Available in two mid-spec variants – the Tigor EV XM and Tigor EV XT – the all-electric compact sedan has three exterior colour options (white, blue and silver) and comes with a basic level of safety kit (dual front airbags, ABS, rear parking sensors, etc.) ensuring that it conforms with the new norms that come into effect on July 1, 2019.

In terms of features, the XM and XT variants are nearly identical, although the latter variant gets 14-inch alloy wheels (instead of steel wheels) and power-adjustable wing mirrors for the Rs 10,000 premium. Both trims are also decently equipped, especially for the fleet market, though, interestingly, boot space is down by about 89 litres as compared to the standard model’s 419 litres. Other features available are similar to the internal combustion engine-powered Tigor XM, including body-coloured bumpers and door handles, LED tail-lamps, a climate control unit, driver’s seat height-adjust, power windows and a Harman-sourced 2-DIN audio system with Bluetooth, USB and AUX connectivity.

Mechanically, both are powered by a 16.2kWh battery pack that sends 30kW (41hp) at 4,500rpm and 105Nm of torque at 2,500rpm to the front wheels through a 72V, 3-phase AC induction motor. While Tata claims 142km range on a single charge, our exclusive review of the Tigor EV showed that it could do about 100km.

While the battery pack can be charged up to 80 percent in 6hr via a standard AC wall socket, a DC 15kW fast charger would do the same in a claimed 90min.

Tata offers a three-year/1.25 lakh kilometre warranty with the vehicle and with the battery pack.

(All prices are ex-showroom, Delhi.)

Also see:

Tata Tigor EV review, test drive

Blog: Hall of FAME

Click here for Tata Tigor prices, reviews, images, videos and more

Click here for Tata models, prices, reviews, images, videos and more
