I think we'll be guided by national interest: S Jaishankar

Laying the foundation for Prime Minister Narendra Modi's meeting with US President Donald Trump in Osaka on the sidelines of the 14th G20 Summit, US Secretary of State Mike Pompeo met PM Modi and External Affairs Minister S Jaishankar in New Delhi on Wednesday.

The Prime Minister reiterated the importance his government attaches to relations with the US and "outlined his vision for the strategic partnership in the new tenure of the government"; but later in the day, Jaishankar emphasized that India will be guided by national interest.

The contentious issue of the S-400 missile deal with sanctions-hit Russia was on the table for discussion. The Foreign Minister made it clear to Washington that "We have relationships with many countries. Many of them are of some standing, they have a history. I think we will do what is in our national interest."

Last October, India signed an agreement with Russia to procure a batch of the missile defence systems, despite US' warnings against it. India believes that it meets the US waiver criteria for procuring the S-400 missile defence system from sanctions-hit Russia.

Pompeo assured that "both (nations) can work together" and that "India is an important friend" for the US, referring to the Trump administrations efforts to gain more market access in India. "A sign of a mature relationship is the ability to negotiate your way (through prickly issues)," agreed Jaishankar.

Jaishankar and his US counterpart spoke on a wide range of issues – such as the impact of the US-Iran tensions, H-1B Visas and terrorism – in what was the first high-level interaction between the two countries after the return of the Modi government to power.

Terrorism was something both nations agreed on, with the Foreign Minister expressing India's appreciation for the "strong support" received from the Trump administration for India's zero-tolerance policy towards cross-border terrorism. "

The US will strengthen India's ability to fight terrorism," assured Pompeo, adding New Delhi's ability to battle the scourge "should be second to none".Against the backdrop of the current Tehran-Washington tensions, Jaishankar shared India's concerns about the diaspora, regional security and trade ventures. Pompeo too called for the need to make sure the Strait of Hormuz is open for trade and reiterated US's view that Iran is the biggest sponsor of terror.

On the topic of Indo-Pacific region, the Foreign Affairs Minister said the guiding principle is "for something and not against somebody. And that something is peace, security, stability, prosperity and rules", in an oblique reference to China. "We are really looking at a landscape where a number of independent players can work together for what they believe is global good." However, The US Secretary was vociferous in his criticism of China, saying countries who are part of Beijing's Belt and Road initiative "shackles attached, not strings".

UP For Discussion

Prelude to PM Modi and President Trump’s meet in Osaka

Last Oct, India signed deal with Russia to procure a batch of missile defence systems, despite US’ warnings against it

US assured that it ‘will strengthen India’s ability to fight terrorism’ adding New Delhi’s ability to battle the scourge ‘should be second to none’

On Indo-Pacific region, Foreign Minister said the guiding principle is ‘for something and not against somebody’ in an oblique reference to China

– Zee Media Newsroom with agency inputs
