Amit Shah meets family of J-K police inspector Arshad Khan killed in Anantnag terror attack

New Delhi:

Union Home Minister Amit Shah on Thursday met with the family members Arshad Khan, SHO Anantnag in Srinagar who was killed in a terror attack on June 12. 40-year-old Khan died at the AIIMS in Delhi. Five CRPF personnel were killed in the terror attack, in which a lone Jaish-e-Mohammed (JeM) terrorist targeted a patrol team of the paramilitary force.

Khan, the SHO of Saddar Police station in Anantnag, reached the site soon after. The moment he stepped out of his official bulletproof vehicle, along with his service rifle, a barrage of bullets were fired by the terrorist. One ricocheted from the butt of his service rifle and hit his liver and duodenum, the officials said.

Jammu & Kashmir: Union Home Minister Amit Shah in Srinagar meets family of SHO Anantnag Arshad Khan who lost his life in a terror attack on June 12. pic.twitter.com/KKeCl6k5NT — ANI (@ANI) June 27, 2019



ALSO READ | Ahead of meeting PM Modi, Trump tweets 'tariffs imposed by India unacceptable'



Signifying the importance given to Jammu and Kashmir by Prime Minister Narendra Modi's government, Amit Shah on Wednesday chose the state for his maiden visit after assuming office and reviewed the security situation. Breaking away from protocol, Governor Satya Pal Malik, accompanied by his advisors and some top officials of the state administration, received Shah at the airport, officials said. Governors in the past have normally only received the prime minister while visiting the state.

Immediately after his arrival, the Home minister, who is on a two-day visit, chaired a high-level meeting of civil administration officials and top bosses of various security agencies in the state, the officials said.

Malik, his advisor incharge Home Affairs K Vijay Kumar, Home Secretary Rajiv Gauba, state Chief Secretary B V R Subrahmanyam, Northern Army Commander Lt Gen Ranbir Singh, DGP Dilbagh Singh and divisional commissioners from the Valley and Jammu were present in the meeting, they said.

The Home minister was briefed about the overall security situation in the state, especially in the aftermath of the Pulwama terror attack in which 40 CRPF personnel were killed, the officials said.



ALSO READ | Let's speak out strongly in favour of religious freedom: Mike Pompeo in India

The officials also informed Shah about various steps taken to eliminate the top militant leadership, while ensuring that the ultras are not able to carry out Pulwama-like attacks, they said. Shah was also briefed about the steps taken for ensuring smooth and safe conduct of the annual Amarnath Yatra, which is due to commence on July 1, the officials said.

For all the Latest India News, Download News Nation Android and iOS Mobile Apps.
