Trade and terror: When Modi meets Trump in Japan

Donald Trump wants the Narendra Modi government to lower the trade barriers and adopt fair and reciprocal trade. (File photo: Reuters)

Prime Minister Narendra Modi is in Japan and will be meeting US President Donald Trump on Friday in Osaka, the venue for G20 summit. Modi-Trump meeting assumes significance in the wake of increasing differences between the two countries over trade tariff, India's defence deal with Russia and US's posturing against Iran.

Trade and terror are set to dominate the talks between Modi and Trump. Trump wants the Modi government to lower the trade barriers and adopt what he calls "fair and reciprocal" trade. India and the US are in what appears an early stage of tariff war.

Trump administration increased tariff on aluminium and steel last year impacting India's export to the US. India waited for months hoping an agreement could be reached but responded only after Trump administration ended the duty-free import from India under the Generalised System of Preferences (GSP) this year. India recently increased tariff on 28 items that it imports from the US.

Strong response from India seems to have irked Donald Trump, who tweeted ahead of meeting with Narendra Modi calling tariffs by India as "unacceptable". He wrote, "I look forward to speaking with Prime Minister Modi about the fact that India, for years having put very high Tariffs against the United States, just recently increased the Tariffs even further. This is unacceptable and the tariffs must be withdrawn!"

I look forward to speaking with Prime Minister Modi about the fact that India, for years having put very high Tariffs against the United States, just recently increased the Tariffs even further. This is unacceptable and the Tariffs must be withdrawn! Donald J. Trump (@realDonaldTrump) June 27, 2019

While trade tariff would be the main focus of Trump during his meeting with Modi, the Indian Prime Minister is likely to push for waiver from the US for defence deal with Russia and an anti-terror conference on the lines of one held for climate change.

Trade

The US has again become the largest trading partner of India replacing China. India attaches more significance to trade with the US than China for simple arithmetic of balance of trade. India has a favourable balance of trade with the US to the tune of $19 billion while its trade deficit with China is about $57 billion.

On the other hand, the US is also engaged in a bitter trade war with China and not in a position to have adversarial trade ties with India. But Trump has been insisting on lower tariff for American imports in India.

According to a fact-sheet released earlier this week by the US state department, the US purchases close to one-fifth of its exports and sees enormous potential "to grow trade relationship and create the high-quality jobs that Prime Minister Modi wants if India lowers trade barriers and embraces fair and reciprocal trade."

India-US bilateral goods and services trade stood at $142 billion in 2018 with a jump of 12.6 per cent over the previous year. To address India's energy concern, the US has also increased crude oil exports to India from 10 million barrels in 2017 to 50 million barrels in 2018.

The 2019 figures are expected to be bigger as Trump administration hopes India will cut down its oil import from Iran against whom the US has imposed economic sanctions.

India has entered into an agreement with Russia to buy S-400 missile defence system. But the US has imposed a sanction on arms purchase from Russia under the Countering America's Adversaries Through Sanctions Act (CAATSA). India has been calling for an exception and waiver from the US.

India will procure S-400 missile defence systems from Russia. (File photo: SPUTNIK)

Terror

For Trump administration, Iran is the biggest source of global terror. It is a position that India does not share with Trump administration. However, PM Modi will be pushing for a broader agreement on fighting terror during his talks with President Trump.

Modi has already outlined his new approach to deal with terror on his first foreign tour after being voted back to power. On June 8, Modi addressed Maldivian Parliament and proposed holding a "global conference" on countering terrorism on the lines of the summits on climate change.

Narendra Modi was conferred with Malidves' highest honour "Rule of Nishan Izzuddeen" during his two-day visit to the country in June this year. (File photo: Twitter)

"The water is now rising above the head," PM Modi had said urging the international community to present a united front to combat terror.

This figured during the meeting between External Affairs Minister S Jaishankar and his US counterpart Michael Pompeo in New Delhi on Wednesday.

In the joint press conference that followed, Jaishankar said, "We have, of course, Prime Minister's initiative for a global conference on terrorism and I am sure that is something the US would look at positively."

In 2017, Modi had raised the issue of terrorism in G-20 summit held in Hamburg, Germany. He had compared Lashkar-e-Taiba and Jaish-e-Muhammed with the Islamic State and al-Qaeda.

Modi had proposed that officials from the countries extending active support terrorists should be barred from entering G-20 countries. This was clearly aimed at Pakistan, which has since been under tremendous pressure from international agencies to take visible action against terror outfits.
