1 killed, 35 hurt in clash at Ludhiana Central Jail

rchopra@tribunemail.com

Tribune News Service

Ludhiana, June 27

One inmate was killed and 11 persons, including five inmates and six police personnel, were injured in violence that broke out at the Ludhiana Central Jail today. The deceased was identified as Ajit Baba, who died after being hit by a bullet.

Inmates reportedly got agitated after hearing that Sunny Sood, an undertrial under the NDPS Act, had died during treatment at Rajindra Hospital, Patiala, on Wednesday. Inmates alleged Sunny was hospitalised after being brutally assaulted by jail staff.

Jail Superintendent Shamsher Singh, however, maintained that Sunny had consumed some poisonous substance on Wednesday evening. He was taken to the Ludhiana Civil Hospital from where he was referred to Rajindra Hospital, Patiala, where he died.

The face-off between the jail staff and inmates began around 11.30 am after around 3,100 inmates refused to go back to their barracks and started pelting policemen and other staff with stones and bricks lying on the jail premises in connection with some construction work.

The Jail Superintendent said the gangsters (1,617) lodged in the jail had instigated other jail inmates to indulge in violence.

Taking advantage of the ruckus, some inmates tried to escape, but could not succeed. Some of them suffered injuries in their attempt to flee after scaling a wall.

Inmates vandalised jail property, set on fire record room, Jail Superintendent’s car, along with another vehicle, and some LPG cylinders lying in the mess. Two fire tenders were pressed into service to douse the flames. Anti-riot vans were also requisitioned.

Inmates injured in the melee were Vishal Kumar, Prince, Sunil, Ranbir and Pankaj. Six cops, including ACP Sandeep Wadhera, were also injured after being hit by stones hurled by inmates.

Sources said around 70 police personnel were on duty to handle 3,100 inmates in the jail. Around 300 police personnel were rushed to the spot to control the situation.

The police allegedly opened fire and used tear gas, but the situation could be brought under control only by 2.30 pm.

Constable Surinder Kumar, who suffered injuries in the legs, said around 250 inmates hurled stones at policemen.

DC PK Aggarwal said an ACP was among the injured. He said all inmates had been sent back into barracks. The police fired into the air to stop them from fleeing. Jail Minister SS Randhawa said none had escaped from the jail.
