Bomb threat forces Air India flight from Mumbai to New York to land in Stansted

Police have revealed they found 'nothing suspicious' on an Air India plane after a hoax bomb threat sent by email forced RAF jets to escort it into Stansted today.

Up to 400 passengers have been 'quarantined' for more than six hours after the Boeing 777 heading to New York's Newark airport was diverted to London at 9.50am.

But this afternoon an Air India spokesman said an email sent to Mumbai Airport warning about explosives on board the plane that left hours earlier was bogus.

Two Typhoons had been called in from RAF Coningsby and caused a sonic boom over the East Midlands as they hit 767mph to meet the jet before escorting it Stansted's runway.

The aircraft was parked on an isolated stand used by the SAS to train for hijackings until at 4pm Essex Police confirmed there was 'nothing suspicious' on board.

Armed police were forced to evacuate hundreds of passengers who were 'frisked' and had their bags checked by sniffer dogs before being taken by bus to a hangar while explosives experts searched the inside and outside of the plane.

Passenger Dino Goel filmed the evacuation and said the police were checking each person 'by hand', paying particular attention to their bags and small suitcases.

He tweeted: 'All passengers were disembarked one-by-one, deplaned, frisked and checked by sniffer dogs. We are now at a quarantined reception area at the Stansted Airport.'

The Boeing 777, which holds up to 396 passengers, had already been delayed for three hours before leaving Mumbai, MailOnline understands.

Sniffer dogs and police search passengers and their hand luggage after they were evacuated from the Air India plane bound for New York and diverted to Stansted after a hoax bomb threat

This is the extraordinary moment RAF Typhoon jets escorted this passenger plane across England to the London airport

The plane is being held in the area of Stansted used for hijacking and bomb threats, some distance from the main terminal

Psssengers on board said they and the staff had no idea why they were escorted by the RAF until they were evacuated (pictured)

Armed police were on the Tarmac as the plane and its passengers were searched this afternoon - but nothing suspicious was found

Air India admitted it was a bomb threat in a tweet that they later deleted. A spokesman said an email bomb warning was bogus

Despite the all-clear the passengers are still waiting for updates to let them know if they can get back on the grounded plane.

Richelle DCosta is travelling with her four-year-old son and her husband, Marwin Saldanha, who said: 'I just got off a video chat with them. Security is sweeping all bags right now it seems.

'They know there was a security scare for which the checks are happening.

'Not sure how much more they know - the airlines are keeping mum. She has a connection to Pittsburgh, so definitely going to miss that.'

Footage from the ground showed the moment the RAF Typhoons screeched across the sky near Stansted, where the runway was briefly closed before being opened again.

The 15hr flight from India to America was turned around over Northern Ireland with airline saying it was a 'bomb threat' before deleting its tweet.

Essex Police said an aircraft has been diverted to Stansted Airport on Thursday morning after a 'security alert'.

A loud bang reported by several residents of Derby on social media was later linked to the unscheduled landing of the Air India Boeing 777 flight at Stansted.

Dave Bowler, 44, captured the noise on his CCTV.

The landscape gardener, who was working at a nursery in Borrowash at the time of the boom, said: 'It frightened me to death, it's not every day you hear that.

'You could feel it in your chest as it went off. It was a scary for a minute and I was a bit concerned but it was nice to find out that nobody was hurt.

'I thought it was a gas explosion but other people thought it was from a firework factory somewhere. It was very strange'.

Dave said he rang his 16-year-old son who was at home in Spondon.

He added: 'My lad said it shook the windows and everything. He was quite concerned.'

One resident of Long Eaton told MailOnline the bang was so loud he thought it was an air crash at the nearby East Midlands Airport. Another witness claimed the ground shook and they feared it was an earthquake.

The Boeing 777 plane was travelling from Mumbai to Newark before being diverted to London Stansted as it approached Belfast this morning after trouble on board

RAF Typhoons were filmed screeching across the sky near Stansted, causing a sonic boom as they flew from Lincolnshire

The RAF were called to escort the plane, briefly causing a loud bang as they hit top speed to escort the passenger plane, which carries up to 396 people. It is not known how many people are on board

The stranded people on board who were heading for the US are now stuck in Britain while the plane is searched. An Air India official has claimed the bomb threat is a hoax

The Air India Boeing 777 plane holds up to 396 passengers and was half way through the 15hr flight to the US. They were searched one-by-one and put on to buses (pictured)

Passengers are being kept in a secure area of the airport in a small building usually used for VIPs

Residents first reported hearing the noise just after 10am today.

RAF jets are not allowed to fly above the speed of sound over land - unless they believe that lives could be in danger.

Stansted Airport said its runway had now re-opened after the emergency landing.

In a statement posted to Twitter it said: 'An Air India Boeing 777 diverted into London Stansted Airport at approximately 10.15hrs and landed safely with Essex Police in attendance. It is parked on an isolated stand away from the normal airport operations.

'Our runway has now re-opened and is fully operational. We are very sorry for any delays and disruption caused by the incident, but our first priority is always the safety of passengers and staff. Thank you for your patience.'

The RAF has apologised for any shock caused by the loud bang caused by their speeding jets.

A spokesman said: 'The RAF can confirm Quick Reaction Alert Typhoon aircraft were launched this morning from RAF Coningsby to intercept a civilian aircraft. The aircraft was safely escorted to Stansted Airport.

'The Typhoon aircraft were authorised to transit at supersonic speed for operational reasons; any inconvenience caused to local residents is regretted.'

Stansted has confirmed that a security alert on the plane forced them to briefly shut the airport

This is the second incident of a plane being emergency landed at Stansted Airport this week.

A woman who allegedly tried to open a Jet2 plane's emergency exit mid-air on Saturday.

Two RAF Typhoon fighters were scrambled to intercept the Airbus 321 after the woman allegedly rushed towards the cockpit - with the plane forced to loop back to the UK.
