Passengers from Air India flight 'quarantined' at Stansted amid bomb fears

The video will auto-play soon 8 Cancel

We have more newsletters

Thank you for subscribing

Something went wrong, please try again later.

Don't miss a thing by getting the Daily Star's biggest headlines straight to your inbox!

Around 400 passengers were forced off the plane and were "frisked" before their bags were checked by sniffer dogs.

It came after two RAF Typhoon jets were scrambled to escort the plane after a bomb threat was made.

The Boeing 777 was travelling to Newark in the US when it was diverted at just before 10am this morning.

Stansted said the plane was held at an "isolated stand away from the normal airport operations" while it was investigated, with the airport also temporarily closing.

But Air India described the security incident as a "hoax", saying the threat was made in a call to Mumbai Airport.

(Image: TWITTER)

"Police still hasn't given the all clear. Seems like a few more hours."

Nirupam Nanavaty, who is also travelling on the flight, said: "There are children and also old and infirm passengers here."

Passengers are still waiting for updates to let them know if they can get back on the grounded plane.

Richelle DCosta is travelling with her four-year-old son.

Her husband, Marwin Saldanha, said: "I just got off a video chat with them. Security is sweeping all bags right now it seems.

"They know there was a security scare for which the checks are happening.

"Not sure how much more they know - the airlines are keeping mum.

"She has a connection to Pittsburgh, so definitely going to miss that."

(Image: GETTY) (Image: GETTY)

Holidaymakers on other flights described being stuck on board planes sitting on the tarmac following the earlier airport closure.

The official RAF Twitter account posted: "The RAF can confirm QRA Typhoons were launched this morning from RAF Coningsby to intercept a civilian ac (aircraft).

"The ac was escorted to Stansted. The Typhoons transited at supersonic speed for operational reasons; any inconvenience caused to local residents is regretted.”

Essex Police also confirmed it was at Stansted assisting.

The alert was stood down at just before 5pm and the flight was cleared to depart again.

The military jets being scrambled coincides with Armed Forces celebrations this week.

Events paying tribute to the brave servicemen and women are being held over the next few days ahead of the famous Armed Forces Day National Event on Saturday.
