'Rename West Bengal as Bangla': Resolution passed in 2018, why Central govt delaying move, asks TMC MP

The resolution passed in the West Bengal Assembly in 2018, claims the TMC MP. | Photo Credit: PTI

Kolkata: Trinamool Congress (TMC) MP Sukhendu Sekhar Ray on Thursday revealed that a resolution was passed in the West Bengal Assembly back in 2018 to rename West Bengal to Bangla. He went on to claim that the resolution has been since pending for Central government's consideration. He stressed that the Mamata Banerjee-led state government got the resolution passed in order to "restore the identity of Bengali people".

While speaking to press, Sukhendu Sekhar Ray said, "In July 2018, the West Bengal Legislative Assembly passed a resolution that West Bengal should be renamed as Bangla and it was since pending for consideration at the end of the central government."

"I would urge upon the central government to give effect to the said resolution passed by the state Legislative Assembly to restore the actual identity of the Bengali people," the TMC MP added.

TMC MP Sukhendu Sekhar Ray has written to Rajya Sabha Secretary General stating, 'In July 2018, the West Bengal Legislative Assembly passed resolution that West Bengal should be renamed as Bangla and it was since pending for consideration at the end of the central govt.' (1/2) — ANI (@ANI) June 27, 2019

The letter further states, 'I would urge upon the central govt to give effect to the said resolution passed by the state legislative assembly to restore the actual identity of the Bengali people.' (2/2) — ANI (@ANI) June 27, 2019

Earlier on Tuesday, newly-elected TMC MPs Nusrat Jahan and Mimi Chakraborty from West Bengal took oath as members of the Lok Sabha in Bengali and concluded their oath by saying, "Jai Hind, Vande Mataram, Jai Bangla".

In mid-June, West Bengal Chief Minister Mamata Banerjee asserted that those who are coming to Bengal and living there must learn to speak the Bengali language.

While addressing a rally, the CM said, "I respect all states. When I go to Bihar, UP, and Punjab, I speak in their language. If you are in Bengal you have to speak Bangla. We have to bring Bangla forward. I will not tolerate criminals who stay in Bengal and roam around on bikes. I will not let Bengal become like Gujarat."

The most recent high-profile renaming of a place came last year when Uttar Pradesh Chief Minister Yogi Adityanath changed the name of Allahabad to Prayagraj. During an election rally in December 2018 in Telangana, the BJP leader said that his party will rename Hyderabad to Bhagyanagar if voted to power.
