Swamy address in Rajya Sabha – Technology to save environment

In a 3-minute speech in the Rajya Sabha, Swamy stressed the need for India to explore new technologies to combat Climate Change

Today’s address by Dr. Subramanian Swamy in Rajya Sabha was mainly focused on saving the environment. In his address in Rajya Sabha, he affirmed that Indians through ancient times have worshipped the environment be it rivers, trees, rocks. Hence, there is no point in teaching India about the environment.

He also applauded Prime Minister’s initiatives for giving national focus for saving the environment through various schemes at a micro-level such as the Ujawala Yojana, clean Ganga drive etc.

Swamy suggested that the Environment Ministry should motivate other ministries to develop new technology which would help save our environment.

When there was a problem with regard to Cauvery water between Karnataka and Tamil Nadu, Swamy had suggested the same to Tamil Nadu that set-up desalination of seawater to solve their water woes.

He recommended that the Ministry should focus on setting-up plants for Desalination of Seawater which would solve the problem of scarcity of water.

Also, suggested that IITs should be encouraged to develop Hydrogen Fuel Cell for Automobiles and using Thorium, which the cleanest form for generating electricity.

Swamy added that cars that run on Hydrogen Fuel cell based-fuel will help India to escape its dependence on crude oil.

Swamy warned that since many of the companies from the US had invested huge amounts in infrastructure for crude oil extraction and refining, it might pose stumbling blocks for research into the technology.

“The US has huge amounts of oil. The oil companies there have also developed huge infrastructure in this sector. Therefore, they do not want other countries to develop alternatives such as Hydrogen Cell Fuels,” he said.[1]

When there was a problem with regard to Cauvery water between Karnataka and Tamil Nadu, Swamy had suggested the same to Tamil Nadu that set-up desalination of seawater to solve their water woes. This technology was first adopted by Israel.[2]

To the date there are two desalination plants in Chennai, one each at Minjur and at Nemmeli. The foundation stone for the third seawater desalination plant in neighbouring Kancheepuram district was laid today by the TN chief minister. The two more plants are proposed to come up at Perur and Pattipulam.

References:

[1] Focus on cars that run on hydrogen cell fuel : Dr. Swamy – Oct 15, 2013, Swamy’s Blog

[2] Swamy bats for seawater desalination plants – Feb 4, 2018, The Hindu
