Why a selfie ban has been imposed in these tourist spots across the world

Recently, two incidents of inappropriate tourist behaviour went viral — one, when a 22-year-old man was arrested for posing indecently with female sculptures at the famous Brihadeeshwara Temple in Tanjore and the other, when social media influencers snapped sexy selfies at Chernobyl (a nuclear disaster site located in the Soviet Union near Pripyat in Ukraine). Both these incidents drew flak from netizens, who were visibly upset with the insensitivity and lack of respect on display. However, they also highlight a growing problem — of tourists that go to any lengths, even at the cost of risking their lives, to capture a shot to grab eyeballs. Here are a few examples, where authorities had to step in and lay the law.Insensitive selfies at Auschwitz concentration campsThere is a type of tourist, who has a penchant for visiting sites that have a tragic past. Chernobyl near the city of Pripyat in the north of the Ukrainian SSR, Kumsusan Memorial Palace of the Sun, North Korea, Auschwitz concentration camps, Poland have all been popular Dark Tourism destinations with macabre pasts. And while there is nothing wrong with visiting these locations as they are a lesson in history, taking insensitive selfies can trigger painful memories for survivors. Take for example, the Auschwitz concentration camps, where visitors would try balancing on the railway tracks, forcing officials at Auschwitz Memorial, to remind tourists they must “respect” the memory of the dead. One such tweet shared by officials included pictures of four people, who stood on the lines, and read, “There are better places to learn how to walk on a balance beam than the site, which symbolises deportation of hundreds of thousands to their deaths.” And while many would feel that this should be an unspoken rule that dos not have to be spelt out, these pictures on social media tell another story.Security concernsTourists visiting Phuket could face death sentences or even have to pay fines if they are caught taking selfies at Mai Khao beach. It is popular among tourists for taking photos with incoming planes due to its proximity to the Phuket International Airport runway, to give an illusion that one is touching the aircraft. Apparently, the selfie runway has become a distraction for pilots and that’s why it is becoming illegal to take photos there.Breaking rules at the Trevi FountainOfficials across the globe have been increasingly forced to consider multiple solutions to tackle unruly tourists. Take for example The Trevi Fountain in Rome, which is considered to be one of the most beautiful fountains in the world. However, that has not stopped selfie crazy tourists from attempting to paddle in it, drawing inspiration from the 1960 movieLa Dolce Vita, and even sitting on the edge to eat or drink(both of which are not permitted). As a result, authorities levy a hefty fine on those tourists, who may be tempted to throw caution to the winds and attempt to swim in the fountain or eat or drink near it.Environmental issuesThe tourist board Visit Iceland has launched several initiatives attempting to promote responsible behaviour by tourists. It warns visitors in videos and on its website about the importance of Icelandic moss (which is particularly fragile and can die if trampled on) and the need to keep to main roads and tracks while driving. Tourists are also made to sign a pledge at the airport where they promise to leave places as they found them and will not urinate in the countryside.To save livesWe’ve all seen videos of people trying to kiss a cobra or pose for a selfie with a bear. Some tourists will go to any extent to snap a shot with a lion or a bear, even at the risk of being eaten alive. That’s why Johannesburg’s Lion Park and authorities at Lake Tahoe in California have banned selfies with lions. This holds true for Lake Tahoe too, where they have banned selfies with bears. Also, officials in Spanish town Pamplona banned selfies during the Running of the Bulls event, after one man was gored to death when he sneaked a snap with his back to the bulls.Selfie of a tourist sitting on the holy throne at a templeThis year, the government in Bali was forced to crack down on tourists taking selfies after a photo of a Danish tourist sitting on Linggih Padmasana shrine at Puhur Luhur Batukaru temple, went viral. The shrine, which is shaped like a throne on top of a pillar, is reserved for the most important deity in Balinese Hinduism, known as the Supreme God. And to sit on it is seen as highly offensive to the locals. The obnoxious tourist behaviour prompted officials to rethink what tourists could and couldn’t do around Bali’s Hindu temples. They have also been forced to consider a ban on westerners in bikinis following several incidents including one in 2016, where a young woman dressed in a bikini sparked outrage in Bali when she was photographed in a yoga pose in front of a temple. They lamented the decline in the “quality of tourists” visiting the island.While selfies have become a way to interact with your followers on social media, it gets into the bizarre realm when you are willing to do anything to shock your audience. Psychiatrist Dr Hemant Mittal explains “Social media has become a vital part of our existence and also a means of validation. This constant need for validation can sometimes drive people away from reality, and in a bid to get a reaction from their followers they share posts in the form of pictures and videos that maybe considered gory, macabre, extremely insensitive and dangerous. This ‘type’ thrives on both positive and negative comments and will go to any lengths to grab eyeballs as their perception of what is right or wrong has blurred. Their end goal is to get as many likes and comments on a particular post, even at the risk of being trolled or endangering their lives.”Clinical psychologist Seema Hingoranny agrees and adds, “A lot of people like to document their experiences using selfies and videos. In that moment, their focus is on clicking that one good picture or video that will get them a lot of likes and comments on social media. As a result, they do not realise they are in danger until it's very late. For others, it’s about proving to the world that they are edgy and can do things that others won’t. When people click a selfie in a place with a dark past, it's about documenting a moment or an experience but not necessarily connecting or feeling empathy for what transpired there.”Clearly, all of the above incidents make a case for a more aware and ethical traveller, who is not a selfie crazy tourist.The Indian government created no-selfie zones across all tourist spots in India to address the problem. To start with they identified no-selfie zones in Mumbai and Goa. Authorities identified and declared 16 dangerous spots in Mumbai as ‘no-selfie zones’, which included popular tourist spots like Marine Drive and Girgaum Chowpatty Beach. Goa has also identified 24 no-selfie-zones.In January, Gigi Wu, an experienced hiker from Taiwan (who was popular on social media for photographing herself on the summits of more than 100 of Asia’s most impressive peaks, in a bikini) fell an estimated 60 to 100 feet from Taiwan’s Yushan National Park, and later died.In February, a 27-year-old man died of burn injuries after he came in contact with a live overhead wire while reportedly taking selfie atop a parked goods train in Jamshedpur.In March, a tourist fell 1,000 feet to his death at Grand Canyon West’s Eagle Point while trying to snap a selfie.In April, a 20-year-old university student fell about 100 feet to her death while hiking on a class trip to the Ozarks in the US.In May, a woman in her early 20s died while taking a phone portrait near a waterfall near Lake Tahoe in America.
