Leader of India's Punjab calls for sanctions against Canada if it does not crack down on Sikh extremists

This advertisement has not loaded yet, but your article continues below.

Leader of India's Punjab calls for sanctions against Canada if it does not crack down on Sikh extremists 'India had, for too long, been soft towards Canada and needed to crack its whip aggressively, even seek UN sanctions if needed, to end the growing threat once and for all' Photo by NarInder Nanu/AFP/Getty Images

Article content Capt. Amarinder Singh has always made it clear he thinks Canada is soft on alleged Sikh extremists in this country.

Advertisement Story continues below This advertisement has not loaded yet, but your article continues below.

Advertisement Story continues below This advertisement has not loaded yet, but your article continues below.

Article content It’s unclear what prompted the latest outburst, although it follows a decision by the federal government in April to remove specific references to Sikh extremism from a contentious Public Safety Canada report on terrorism. A spokesman for Global Affairs Canada said Friday that Singh’s allegations “are, and always have been, completely unfounded.” The government strongly condemns terrorism of all kinds and has been working with India on various counter-terrorism issues, the spokesman said. At the same time, the government strenuously defends the right to free expression, he said. The Indian government has also voiced concerns over Canadian politicians’ approach to Sikh nationalism, but the Indian High Commission in Ottawa did not reply to a request for comment. For Sikhs here, Singh’s verbal attack comes “completely out of left field,” said Balpreet Singh, legal counsel for the World Sikh Organization. The allegations are unfounded — and some of them are “outlandish” — but they will nonetheless harm Canadian members of the faith, he said. It hurts us here as a community “What this looks like to us … is foreign interference, a narrative created in India and pushed into Canada about Canadian Sikhs,” said Singh. “It hurts us here as a community. It’s something that affects our reputation, and affects folks here on the ground.” Singh suggested the Punjab leader may simply be angry that Canada barred him from coming here in 2016 to campaign among the Indian diaspora, a group considered to have considerable influence and financial clout in Punjab politics.

Advertisement Story continues below This advertisement has not loaded yet, but your article continues below.

Article content Accusing another country of giving a safe haven to terrorists could also help distract voters from the state’s struggling economy, he said. Amarinder Singh, a former Indian army officer, first aired his criticisms of Canada in April 2017, when he insisted the four Sikhs in Trudeau’s cabinet were Khalistanis — a charge denied by all of them — and refused to meet Sajjan when the minister visited Punjab. Peaceful support for an independent Khalistan in India is strong among leadership of Sikh temples in Canada — with some “gurdwaras” displaying portraits of alleged extremists — and Canadian politicians have for years now reached out to such leaders as they court the powerful Sikh vote. One of the guests on Trudeau’s ill-fated India trip in February 2018 was Jaspal Atwal, convicted of attempting to assassinate an Indian cabinet minister in 1986. Photo by Sean Kilpatrick/The Canadian Press Trudeau sat down with Singh for a fence-mending session during that same trip, with the Punjab chief minister handing over a list of nine alleged Sikh extremists in Canada. Whether by coincidence or not, at least three Sikhs were for the first time placed on the federal no-fly list last year. Last December’s edition of the annual terror report also mentioned the threat of Sikh terrorism for the first time, though that phrasing was removed and replaced with a reference to extremists who pursue separatism in India after an outcry from Sikh leaders here. In his statement, Singh referred to the list of “wanted terrorists” he provided to Trudeau last year but said “the lack of response from their government so far has exposed their intent.” Canada’s “failure to check anti-India activities being carried out from its soil would be detrimental to its own security and interests in the long run,” he warned. As evidence, the chief minister quoted extensively from the 2010 findings of a public inquiry into the Air-India bombing by Sikh terrorists, which concluded the attack followed a “cascading series of errors” by security agencies 34 years ago. Singh’s statement exhibits a less-than-perfect knowledge of Canadian political geography, indicating the seat of federal government is Toronto, not Ottawa.

Share this article in your social network

Latest National Stories Advertisement Story continues below This advertisement has not loaded yet, but your article continues below.
