Drought looms large over Cauvery basin as inflow to four reservoirs plummets

Mysuru: Meteorological data collated by various agencies confirms that monsoon became active in Karnataka on June 9. Nearly three weeks after the rain-bearing wind entered the state, the people would have hoped to see the many rivers crisscrossing Karnataka brimming with water. But, the dry riverbeds of some of Karnataka’s lifelines including River Cauvery only serve to reinforce the grim situation prevailing in the state, which appears to be headed towards another drought.Inflow to all rivers in South Karnataka, bar Kapila and Hemavathi , continues to be very poor. Data from the Karnataka Natural Disaster Monitoring Centre ( KSNDMC ), which has a log of the inflow to rivers in the region during the monsoon months, sets the present situation in the state in stark relief – while the average inflow to the four major reservoirs in the Cauvery basin (Hemavathi, Krishnaraja Sagar KRS ), Harangi and Kabini ) in the month of June over the past 45 years comes up to 32tmcft, the figure for June 2019 is 2.35tmcft.However, there is a silver lining – KSNDMC director Srinivas Reddy pointed out that inflow to the four reservoirs in June 2019 was slightly higher than what it was the previous year. “Water to the four reservoirs in the Cauvery basin has flow in trickles. The situation is not any different in the other reservoirs. Although some parts of the state have received moderate rainfall, it has not had any bearing on the inflow to dams. What we are witnessing is a case of hydrological drought, which refers to a situation wherein there is an overall scarcity of water resource,” Reddy told TOI.The lack of any mechanism that could precipitate rain immediately to shore up sowing activity, which appears to be stuck at 35% of the total arable area in the state, has only made matters worse, Reddy said. “The target set by the government is to ensure that sowing is completed in 20 lakh hectares in June, but with just three days to go in this month, sowing is being undertaken only in seven lakh hectares. This is a consequence of the water levels in the dams having plummeted,” he added.Senior farm superintendent for Gramin Krishi Mausam Sewa, Naganahalli in Mysuru P Prakash feared that farmers might incur huge losses if the rain continues to play truant in the region. “Farmers grew several crops such as cotton, green gram, black gram, etc., in the wake of good pre-monsoon showers. Now, many of these standing crops are withering away owing to the lackluster monsoon,” Prakash said.‘TN trying to manufacture crisis’Public works minister and senior JD(S) leader HD Revanna on Thursday said that the Karnataka government had not been intimated about the visit by officials from Tamil Nadu to the reservoirs in the Cauvery basin.“Tamil Nadu is trying to manufacture a crisis. The water stored in the dams can be used for 30 days only. But, the government in the neighbouring state continues to insist on release of water. We will continue to fight the issue legally,” Revanna said.CM not avenging Nikhil’s Lok Sabha loos, Puttaraju assures Mandya farmersAgainst the backdrop of the monsoon failing to gather steam in Karnataka and inflow to reservoirs of the River Cauvery thinning down to a trickle, farmers relying on its waters are growing increasingly anxious with each day. With water level in the KRS Reservoir not witnessing the spike that the authorities had so desperately hoped for in the wake of the monsoon, release of water to the irrigation canals in Mandya has been delayed, and it has now taken a political turn.Minister for minor irrigation CS Puttaraju, also the district in-charge minister for Mandya, told the farmers that the hands of the state government were tied as far as release of water from the KRS Dam was concerned.Assuring the aggrieved farmers that chief minister HD Kumaraswamy was not looking to get back at them for the loss of his son Nikhil Kumaraswamy in the recently concluded Lok Sabha elections, Puttaraju said, “When the general elections were under way, in my capacity as the chairman of the Irrigation Consultative Committee for KRS Dam, I allowed the release of water to the irrigation canals without even being asked to do so. But, now, neither I nor the Karnataka government is in any position to take such a decision. We will have to approach the Cauvery Water Management Board (CWMB) before taking such decisions.”The minister met G Madegowda, a veteran farmer leader and politician, who has been at the vanguard of the Cauvery agitation in Karnataka for the past several decades. Puttaraju reportedly told Madegowda that the state cabinet would deliberate on the possibility of releasing water to the canals on Friday.Activists and office-bearers of the Karnataka Rajya Raitha Sangha (KRRS), who have launched an indefinite protest in Mandya, set 11am on Friday as the deadline for the state government to come up with a favourable decision on the issue. “If water is not released to the canals, we will lay siege to the KRS Reservoir. We will also block vehicular movement on all highways passing through Mandya, including the Mysuru-Bengaluru highway,” said Darshan Puttanaiah.
