Telegraph Travel Awards 2019: Win a £28,000 snow leopard safari

Voting in the 2019 Telegraph Travel Awards is open, giving you the opportunity to reward those operators and destinations that continue to surpass your expectations. And because we recognise you need to invest time and energy to make these awards what they are, as a reward for your efforts we are offering you the chance to win one of 15 luxury holidays – including this 14-day adventure tour of India worth £28,000.

This 14-day adventure for two starts in Delhi, staying at The Imperial Hotel, before heading up to the high mountains of Ladakh in search of the ghost of the mountains with Voygr Expeditions. The high reaches of the Ladakh Range are prime territory for the magnificent Snow Leopard and Voygr’s expert guides are the best in the business. If you’ve seen the “Mountains” episode of BBC’s Planet Earth II, where snow Leopards were caught on film for the first time, you’ve seen the tracking abilities of the Voygr team, as they were responsible for guiding the crew.

How to enter

Follow this link to tell us about your favourite travel companies and destinations – and to enter the draw for one of 15 prizes. You will need to leave your name, telephone number and a valid email address. See here for full terms and conditions.

A leopard safari is an unforgettable experience Credit : All Rights Reserved, Behzad J.Larry

Full details of this prize

After leaving the striking surroundings of The Imperial Hotel, a short flight to the Trans-Himalayan of Leh will see your first few days acclimatising at the Grand Dragon Hotel. The days will be spent a slower than normal pace, enjoying the incredible food and drink and views the property has to offer. A few easy days of sightseeing initially will allow you to gently acclimatize to the altitude of Leh. After that guests will undertake a a short trek or horse ride into the national park. This will be base camp as you search for the ghost of the mountains.

Hemis National Park is India’s largest conservation area with over 1,700 square miles of territory. The park lies within the Karakoram-West Tibetan Plateau alpine steppe ecoregion. Most reports indicate that the park is home to a large breeding population of snow leopards mainly in the Rumbak and Matho area. Along with the Snow Leopard the Park is home to Argali (Great Tibetan Sheep), Bharal (Blue Sheep), Shapu (Ladakhi Urial), and plenty of domesticated yaks. A small population of the Asiatic Ibex is also present in Hemis. Other predators besides the snow leopard include the Tibetan wolf, the Eurasian brown bear (endangered in India), and the red fox. Small mammals include the Himalayan marmot, mountain weasel, and the Himalayan mouse hare.

The Hemis National Park is an incredible place to study Himalayan and Trans-Himalayan birds of prey including the golden eagle, the lammergeier vulture, and the Himalayan griffon vulture Credit : Behzad J Larry

The park is an incredible place to study Himalayan and Trans-Himalayan birds of prey including the golden eagle, the lammergeier vulture, and the Himalayan griffon vulture. The Rumbak Valley offers good opportunities for birdwatching, including several Tibetan species not common in other parts of India. Birds present here include brown accentor, robin accentor, Tickell’s leaf warbler, streaked rosefinch, Tibetan snowfinch, chukar, fork-tailed swift, red-billed chough, Himalayan snowcock, and the fire-fronted serin.

The camp will be moved depending on where the snow leopard activity is happening to ensure maximum success. The trip will then end flying back into Delhi, enjoying your last night at The Imperial Hotel.

Hemis National Park is India’s largest conservation area with over 1,700 square miles of territory Credit : Behzad J Larry

Voygr Expeditions

An oasis of calm and comfort, The Imperial Hotel Delhi (theimperialindia.com) an iconic and the distinguished address situated in the heart of the Indian capital. Designed by Lutyens, it is reminiscent of the halcyon days of the Raj. A luxury hotel with an awe-inspiring heritage interwoven in colonial elegance, it dwells in its modern delivery of old-style class and magnificence, just a few steps away from Connaught Place.

Established in 2007, The Grand Dragon Ladakh (thegranddragonladakh.com) was one of the first luxury hotels in Ladakh and is owned and operated by the Abdu family from Leh, who have more than 40 years of experience welcoming visitors to the beautiful region. It is decorated magnificently with handmade paintings by Gulam Mustafa (Ladakh’s first modern artist) around every corner, and fixtures that are reminiscent of royalty.

Voygr Expeditions (voygr.com) is an experiential travel provider in North India and Central Asia. It specialises in privileged-access wildlife safaris, photography expeditions, cultural engagement tours, and learning expeditions across the Indian subcontinent, Uzbekistan, Tajikistan, Kyrgyzstan, and Kazakhstan. It started up in Ladakh, India and still calls this stunning region home. CEO Behzad Larry is a professional photographer, historian, and adventurer. An avid explorer, Behzad specializes in documenting the remote reaches of the world. If you can dream up an itinerary in South or Central Asia, they can execute it.
