Short, heavy bursts of rain are here to stay

Length of dry spells to increase, will have serious impact on agriculture: secretary, Ministry of Earth Scirences

Short bursts of heavy rain, like Mumbai received during the 2005 deluge, will likely be the norm and have a serious impact on agriculture, said Dr. M. Rajeevan, secretary, Ministry of Earth Sciences.

“The length of dry spells is going to increase while length of wet spells is going to decrease. But total rainfall in India is going to remain same,” said Dr. Rajeevan, at the Somaiya Public Lecture at the Somaiya Vidyavihar campus on Friday. The college had invited Dr. Rajeevan to speak on the topic, ‘Global climate changes: causes, concerns and commitments.’

Dr. Rajeevan spoke of the causes of global warming, particularly the greenhouse effect. He spoke about how carbon dioxide levels have seen a sharp increase over the past few decades and are a bigger cause of concern than volcanic eruptions or continental drift. “The recent years after 2000 have been the warmest. Their implications include an increase in sea level and ocean temperature. Since oceans absorb carbon dioxide, they are becoming more acidic. Besides, there is a major impact on Arctic ocean ice. Models predict that by 2050, there will be no ice in the Arctic ocean. Very disastrous events will take place if that happens,” Dr. Rajeevan said.

The impact of all this? “You will get extremes. Temperatures are increasing faster, and here is a systematic increase in drought-affected areas,” said Dr. Rajeevan. “The frequency of heavy rain and heat wave is also increasing. There are fewer nights with cold temperatures. Warm nights and days will increase.” The length of dry spells will increase, while that of wet spells will decrease. Because of the heavy spells of rain, farmers will have to adjust their strategies, he said.

India is developing its own model to contribute to the Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change (IPCC) report by 2021, he said. The IPCC is a United Nations body that assesses the science related to climate change. Referring to IPCC’s recent ‘1.5 degree report,’ Dr. Rajeevan said developing countries like India have a very low per capita emission but since the population is high, India ranks third globally in emissions.

“Despite that, in the Paris agreement, we have given a lot of commitment. The Indian government has taken very strong steps to reduce emissions. We cannot say global warming is happening so we will not do development. But even then, they have committed strongly to reduce fuel emissions by 2030. The government wants to bring the share of non-conventional energy to 40% and create a carbon sink,” he said.

In Mumbai, Dr. Rajeevan said an early warning system for floods, similar to Chennai, is being developed. “We will be putting up four radars with a rain gauge network due to which we will be able to measure rainfall every 500 m and update it every 15 minutes. It may not be raining everywhere in Mumbai on a given day. This system will be very useful for people. The radar will come by next year. A mobile app has already been unveiled,” he said.

The India Meteorological Department has developed a system for heat wave forecast wherein it will be able to inform people four to five days in advance. “You can check the possibility of lightning in the State on a mobile app. There are also early warning systems for air quality in place. We tested one in Delhi last year. We will be buying an aircraft for airborne research,” he said.
