5 times when bogus warnings triggered scare about food quality in India

1. Frooti

contamination warning

2. “Plastic In Aashirvaad Atta”

@ITCCorpCom somehow I tried this and it is true. How come your atta becomes like chewing gum ? @TOIIndiaNews… https://t.co/qMz1ToSdwI — Rishi Sachar (@sacharrishi) 1520173468000

3. Plastic sugar rumours

Plastic sugar being sold in Bengaluru markets, creating panic among the residents who are now exercising caution wh… https://t.co/WVROzqe8Nz — ANI (@ANI) 1496823569000

4. “Plastic cabbages from China in India”

5. “Kurkure contains plastic”

NEW DELHI. The IT ministry recently instructed Google and Facebook to take down 'false and malicious' videos and content that spread misinformation regarding safety and quality of food in India.Ministry argued that the 'fake' information spread by miscreants misusing social media is eroding the public's confidence in institutions tasked with food safety The ministry specifically mentioned instances like creating false scare of plastic eggs, plastic rice, melamine in milk etc. to drive home their demand to tech giants.Here are 5 instances (apart from those stated by IT ministry) when panic and fear was spread through hoax warnings:In 2013, a message purporting to be from Delhi Police, was circulated on social media warning people not to drink any product from Frooti since a worker has added HIV-contaminated blood to the drinks.The message read “Important msg from Delhi police to all over India: For the next few weeks, do not drink any product of Frooti, as a worker from the company has added his blood contaminated with AIDS (Acquired Immuno Deficiency Syndrome)...Please forward this message urgently to people you care, share it as much as u can (sic)."The message turned out to be a hoax . It was neither from Delhi Police nor were the claims made true.In a statement issued by Parle Agro, the company that manufactures and distributes Frooti in India, it had debunked the fake message and assured consumers that Frooti products are safe.The statement as posted by the company on its Facebook page can be read here A malicious video was circulated in 2018 and the claim was that Aashirvaad Atta contains plastic.The claim turned out to be false.Consumer goods giant ITC, the company that manufactures ‘Aashirvaad Atta’, called it a mischievous attempt to destroy consumers’ trust in them.“What is being called plastic is in fact Wheat Protein or Gluten, found naturally in all atta. This wheat protein is also known as gluten which binds the atta together and gives elasticity to the dough when kneaded. Please also be informed that, even as per FSSAI regulations under the Food Safety and Standards Act 2006, all atta must contain a minimum of 6% gluten on a dry wheat basis. Read FSSAI's statement on Gluten in Atta” read a statement issued by ITC.Besides filing FIR against those who shared videos falsely accusing it of using plastics, the company even released a video commercial to bust bogus claims.People in parts of Karnataka were alarmed when news reports in 2017 said that plastic sugar was sold in stores.Even news agency ANI reported about it.Sensible consumers wondered why anyone would produce plastic sugar because the cost of production of plastic sugar could be even higher.In January last year, government allayed the fears around this saying that no specific case of presence of plastic sugar was detected/reported from anywhere in the country.The same was established during random sampling and testing of sugar done by the officials of Food Safety Departments of respective States/UTs to check compliance of the standards laid down under the Food Safety and Standards Act, 2006, Rules and Regulations.A video claiming to show how a ‘plastic cabbage ’ peel does not easily catch fire when placed over an open gas flame led rise to rumours of ‘plastic cabbages’ from China making their way to India.While many such videos were actually about wax-food replicas, videos in which real cabbages were used, it took a long time to burn as their leaves are thick and contain a lot of moisture.Videos claiming Pepsico's Kurkure corn puffs -- developed and sold in India -- containing plastic started doing the rounds on social media last year.Calling the whole phenomenon " fake news ," Pepsico India successfully sued to get a court order against Facebook, requiring the company to censor any posts linking Kurkure and plastic, including jokes / criticism of Pepsico products.
