Supply of drinking water under threat due to delayed monsoon

Supply of drinking water under threat due to delayed monsoon

The scanty rainfall, both monsoon and pre-monsoon, has dried up surface as well as ground water, creating water crisis in several parts of India, affecting millions of people. People are forced to walk several miles to fetch water for domestic use, and many a brutal fight has broken out over water. The worse is yet to come. Niti Aayog has warned that 21 cities, including Delhi, Chennai, Bengaluru, and Hyderabad, will run out of groundwater by 2020, and that 40 per cent of India's population will have no access to drinking water by 2030.



The vagaries of the monsoon-- they upset every world. When it rains, it's a deluge; and when it doesn't rain, it's drought and hunger.

The monsoon this year was delayed by a week, arriving in Kerala on June 8 instead of the usual June 1, and it's progress across the country has been the slowest in at least 12 years.

It finally hit Mumbai on June 25, after a more than two weeks delay-- the longest the rains have stayed away from the city in 45 years.

The very late monsoon slowed kharif (autumn) crop sowing as farmers could plant crops on only 9.1 million hectares, 12.5 per cent less than the corresponding period last year, because of insufficient rainfall. Paddy (rice), the main kharif crop that needs plenty of water, saw its acreage slip from 5.47 lakh hectares to 4.26 lakh hectares, as rainfall was deficient by 44 per cent as on June 19. Cotton sowing was down 12 per cent, and soybean planting by 57 per cent. Area for pulses also reduced, from 2.11 lakh hectares to 1.04 lakh hectares. All this has given rise to concerns that the farm output, particularly of paddy, may drastically fall this year.

The scanty rainfall, both monsoon and pre-monsoon, has dried up surface as well as ground water, creating water crisis in several parts of India, affecting millions of people. People are forced to walk several miles to fetch water for domestic use, and many a brutal fight has broken out over water. The worse is yet to come. Niti Aayog has warned that 21 cities, including Delhi, Chennai, Bengaluru, and Hyderabad, will run out of groundwater by 2020, and that 40 per cent of India's population will have no access to drinking water by 2030.

The situation is quite alarming in Chennai, which gets 80 per cent of its water from the northwest monsoon. All the four primary reservoirs that supply water to the city of 10 million have almost dried up. In the past three days, monsoon has, however, gained momentum, covering the entire southern and eastern India. The rainfall deficit has come down to 38 per cent from last week's 44 per cent. By the end of the month, it is expected to be much lower, the India Meteorological Department (IMD) has said.

Within 48 hours, after the southwest monsoon hit Mumbai and covered Maharashtra and was expected to accelerate across India, Met office has again forecast that the monsoon has weakened over most parts of the country and its progress has come to a halt.

When the weather office had said that the monsoon has arrived in Mumbai on June 25 with gusto, there were many Mumbikars on twitter who countered that claim to say that they find many parts of Mumbai without rainfall. Now the same weather office says that a weak monsoon phase is set to start in the State from June 27 and will continue till June 30. A revival of monsoon is expected only after that.

The kharif sowing, which has barely started in Maharashtra, is going to get affected. The below-normal rain during the next few days may even halt it in some parts.

Met department has forecast a normal monsoon this year, July and August making up for the deficient rainfall in June. It says July and August are the months that are crucial for crop yields as it is this period when crops need water. But with the department oscillating between predicting galloping monsoon to week monsoon, how far can one take its forecast of a normal monsoon this year seriously?

When one compares its predictions, one finds that on an average its forecast has been accurate only once every five years over the past two decades, even after taking into account an error band of plus or minus 5 percentage points.

In the past, Skymet-- India's only private forecaster-- has been more accurate in predicting the weather. This year it has predicted below-normal rainfall.

So what if the monsoon actually fail? The sowing of kharif crops, which normally takes place in June, has already been delayed. This has heightened the concerns that parts of the country could face a worsening drought. With depleting groundwater and near empty reservoirs, the prospects look further bleak.

Though India is self-sufficient in rice and wheat, a drought would increase imports of pulses and edible oils, such as palm oil, soy oil and sunflower oil. With little farm production, food prices, including vegetable and pulses prices, are bound to shoot up. This will have an adverse impact on the overall economy and the financial markets as rural demand will slow down with farmers and others having little money in their pocket and thus less purchasing power.

The government then will have to increase spending on welfare schemes, which will raise the country's fiscal deficit. A bleak monsoon hence should leave the government thinking: How will it double farmers' income in the next five years?

Unless the weather takes another unexpected turn. The vagaries of the monsoon.

—[IFS]
