Mumbai continues to witness heavy rains; normal life disrupted due to waterlogged roads, traffic snarls

Mumbai continues to witness heavy rains | Photo Credit: ANI

Mumbai: Heavy rain continued to lash Mumbai and several parts of Maharashtra on Saturday a day after monsoon made onset in the capital of the state. Monsoon rains will lash Mumbai for the next three days, according to the Indian Meteorological Department (IMD).

"Very active monsoon conditions over the west coast, with deep westerlies. Heavy rainfall expected in Mumbai, Thane and around west coast," says IMD, Mumbai.

Heavy downpour in Mumbai and several other parts of the state has disrupted the normal lives as it led to waterlogging, traffic snarls, delayed trains and choked drain.

On Friday, several people also lost their lives in rain-related incidents. At least three people were electrocuted to death in Mumbai’s Goregaon area and 17 were killed in Pune's Kondhwa locality after a wall collapsed. District Collector Pune, Naval Kishore Ram said that the wall collapsed due to heavy rainfall and the people who died in the incident were mostly labourers from Bihar and West Bengal.

Due to the heavy downpour, several low-lying areas in the coastal got submerged and routes were diverted. The SV road near National College (in between Old Khar to Bandra talkies), Sion Road number 24, Vallabh road, Hindamata Cinema on Dr BR Ambedkar Road, Gandhi Market at King’s Circle and Srirang Sabade Marg were some of the areas that got flooded.

The Brihanmumbai Municipal Corporation on Thursday issued an advisory cautioning people against opening manholes. It also warned people against driving in the waterlogged areas.

Meanwhile, Central Railway informed that its Mumbai Suburban services are running normally. “The Central Railway Mumbai Suburban services are running normally on all 4 corridors viz Main line CSMT/Kalyan/Kasara/Karjat/Khopoli, Harbour CSMT/Panvel/Goregaon, Trans Harbour Thane/Vashi/Panvel and 4th corridor to Kharkopar,” Central Railway tweeted.

The minimum temperature is expected to be around 24 degree Celcius while the maximum temperature is likely to hover around 29 degree Celcius.
