US-Iran Military Confrontation Inevitable Once Tehran Exceed Uranium Enrichment: Experts

Is US-Iran Military Confrontation On Cards? Events are taking place that in the coming months may lead to a military confrontation between the US and Iran due to the rapidly deteriorating situation in the Middle East. Iran warned that it would exceed the limits on the amount of enriched uranium which is bound to raise the temperature in the region.

The representative of the Atomic Energy Organization of Iran Behrouz Kamalvandi explained that either due to the inability or unwillingness of European countries – participants of the Joint Comprehensive Action Plan (JCPOA) Iran has been left with no option.

Iran warned that in this case, it would not only resume the enrichment process of uranium, but it will also begin upgrading a heavy-water reactor in Arak. In accordance with the JCPOA deal signed by Iran and the G6 countries (Russia, USA, Britain, France, China and Germany) in 2015, Iran has pledged to impose restrictions on its nuclear program in exchange for the gradual lifting of sanctions.

Iran also agreed – and meticulously fulfilled these promises – to provide the IAEA experts with controlled “regulated access” to their nuclear facilities. SVPD allows Iran to have 300 kilograms of low-enriched uranium and 130 tons of heavy water.

On May 8, 2019, a year after the United States exited the agreement, Tehran announced that it was suspending the fulfilment of a part of its obligations regarding the restrictions on stocks of low-enriched uranium and heavy water.

Tehran was forced to do so by American sanctions, which put the majority of countries that signed the JCPOA deal in a dilemma: to do trade either with Iran or the United States and the choice made by them was obvious. Moreover, not only their European nations but even India and China were among those who “bent over” before the Americans, due to which Iran suffered enormous losses.

All attention to Vienna

The crisis of the JCPOA will become quite obvious on June 28 in Vienna, where the meeting will be held – without representatives of the United States – the Joint Commission on the implementation of the Iranian nuclear deal. On July 7, Tehran, which is unlikely to agree with the further infringement of its sovereignty, so that other signatories could live comfortably due to it, will begin the second phase of reducing its obligations. This has already been announced by the head of the Iranian Foreign Ministry, Javad Zarif.

At the same time, Britain, France and Germany warned Iran, which increased uranium production four times, about the inadmissibility of violating the terms of the agreement. Otherwise, the Europeans promise to restore their own sanctions (which they have already done, in fact, under pressure from the United States, having largely curtailed their trade with Iran), which was terminated under the terms of the 2015 agreement. Thus, on Friday in Vienna, the showdown between Iran with Western signatories will become a mere formality.
