Dy SP NP Patel asked for sexual favours from my husband, says PSI Devendrasinh Rathod's wife

In the Police Sub-Inspector Devendrasinh Rathod suicide case, his wife alleged that he was asked to engage in sexual encounters with the Deputy Superintendent of Police NP Patel during his training at Karai Academy. When he had denied, Patel had allegedly threatened to sack him.



On Tuesday, after Rathod's family refused to accept his body from the hospital and demanded that police authorities dismiss Patel and lodged a complaint against him. A team was then formed by DCP Zone-1 to take statements of Rathod's and Patel's colleagues. In his statement to the team, Patel denied all the allegations levelled against him and said he never tortured Rathod and that any action taken against him was strictly disciplinary.



On Tuesday late night, the deceased cop's wife and his friends were summoned to Sola Police Station to record their statement. Rathod's wife alleged that for the past two months, Rathod seemed disturbed. He used to act normal in front of his mother and father, but when he used to be with her he was a different person and would often break down in the middle of the night.



When she confronted him, he had burst into tears and confessed that Patel was asking for sexual favours from him and when he denied, Patel threatened to ruin his career. Soon, the accused cop started insulting him in front of his colleagues for no reason and even started torturing him.



Seeking justice for Rathod, she demanded strict action taken against the Dy SP and sought his dismissal from service. Rathod's wife also warned the authorities, if no action is taken she will immolate herself.



Taking seriousness note of the matter, Shivanand Jha, Director General of Police, on Wednesday, handed over the case to Ahmedabad Crime Branch. The case files and evidence collected by Sola Police and the team assigned by the DCP Zone-1 were given to crime branch officials and they have begun investigating the case.



Meanwhile, the deceased's family is yet to receive a copy of the application, statement, PM report, and suicide note from Sola Police. The cops refused to hand over the documents to the family saying it is a sensitive issue. The family will move the court to seek redressal. That apart, police also seized Rathod's cellphone from his house at around 2 am on Tuesday.
