EU warns US that any action against Air Italy would constitute a violation of the US-EU Air Transport Agreement

Waterbomber2 wrote:

ICAO has nothong to say in air transport agreements between countries or national/supranational laws concerning foreign ownership.



The EU and US both require majority ownership of airlines within their borders by interests holding citizenships within their borders.

ICAO has everything to do with air service agreements as they are made under the 1944 Chicago convention and the International Air Services Transit Agreement. The ICAO Manual on the Regulation of International Air Transport (Doc 9626) is the reference document.The Air Service Agreement template is an ICAO document, and the agreements when completed are filed with ICAO. The Chicago agreement does not actually specify O&C, therefore it is up to the individual states to make up their own requirements. But one state cannot project their O&C requirements onto another, eg the US cannot project the 25% foreign ownership cap onto other countries. The US is free to further limit foreign ownership or to relax it, it is their domestic policy to manage.Changes to the way these agreements, ownership and control etc are discussed at the ICAO Worldwide Air Transport Conference.The European Union and the European Common Aviation Area, O&C rules have been abolished entirely for airline operations within the European single market, similar was done with an APEC agreement in the early 2000s. The EU approved the DL VS joint venture, VS fly about 70% of their seats to the US, the JV is 50/50. DL owns 49% of VS, so it effectively controlled 50+0.49*50=74.5% of the trans Atlantic JV.The way IG is run is entirely consistent with the EC decision on principle place of business.Nevertheless, the intention of these Regulations is that the principal place of business be situated where the organisation technical management is, in other words, in the case of Regulation (EC) No 2042/2003 where the organisation personnel specified in paragraphs M.A.606, 145.A.30 and 147.A.105 directs, controls or co-ordinates its activities, ensuring that the organisation complies with the requirements specified in their respective annexes.Concerning Regulation 1702/2003 the principal place of business is situated where the personnel specified in 21.A125(b)3 perform their activities under Part 21 Subpart F, and where the organisation personnel specified in paragraph 21A.145(c) directs, controls or coordinates its technical activities, ensuring that the organisation complies with the requirements specified in Part 21 Subpart G.The organisation technical management defines in particular the safety policy and procedures for the organisation and is responsible for quality assurance. It also has the corporate authority to finance it so that it remains in compliance with the requirements. These elements are the fundaments of the safety of the company. Also enforcement actions may be easier because the key personnel is residing in the same country as the competent authority. Such choice may imply that the competent authority may have to make arrangements with the authority of the Member State where the production line, maintenance facility or training facility is located to ensure an appropriate oversight.Nothing stopping the US3 from investing into EU airlines like QR has into IG, and DL has into VS.
