Rajkot: Woman turns predator of her 14-year-old daughter

RAJKOT: In the rarest of rare case that has come to light in Rajkot, a mother who supposed to be protector to her children became perpetrator of her own 14-year-old daughter. She offered her own minor daughter to her paramour in lieu of money, and her paramour allegedly raped her several times over past five years.The woman and her paramour, identified as Vipul Parsana, were arrested on Saturday and booked under IPC sections 373 (buying minor for purposes of prostitution), 376 (rape), 506 (criminal intimidation), 323 (causing hurt) and sections 4, 6, 8, 9 and 17 of Protection of Children from Sexual Offences (POCSO) Act.According to the complaint filed by the teenager's father with the Rajkot B Division police station she was raped by her mother's lover, who used to be their tenant, several times over last five years. The girl has further stated that accused used to pay her mother for allowing him to sleep with her daughter.Police said that five years ago, when the survivor had seen her mother and Parsana (38) in a compromising position, the duo had threatened to kill her father and brother, if she revealed their secret.Then began the ordeal of the survivor. One night, her mother asked her to go sleep with Parsana. When the survivor refused, her mother allegedly pushed her into the room and locked it from outside. Parsana allegedly raped her and when she shouted for help, he gagged her mouth with a piece of cloth."The survivor alleged that Parsana would rape her even in the presence of her mother. When she begged him not to do so, he would say that he had paid for her to her mother. The girl has also alleged that Parsana had taken her, her mother and brother to Somnath and Mount Abu where he had raped her," said V J Fernandez, inspector with Rajkot B division police station.On June 23 this year, when the survivor was going to her friend's house for studies, her mother asked her to leave the house for good, telling her to die but not to come back. "At her friend's home, when her class teacher phoned her, she narrated her sordid tale to him. The teacher advised her to confide to one of her family members whom she trusted the most. The girl then called up her father and narrated her ordeal. Her father then approached gthe police and lodged a complaint against Parsana and her mother, leading to their arrests," said Fernandez.Investigation has revealed that Parsana was married and used to live as a tenant at the survivor's house. As the survivor's father often used to go out of station for his job, Parsana and the survivor's mother had entered into a relationship.
