Andhra Pradesh: Woman Killed by Parents for Marrying out of Caste

New Delhi: In a case of caste-based ‘honour killing’, a woman was killed on Friday, allegedly by her parents in Usarapenta village of Chittoor district in Andhra Pradesh. Hemavathi, a 23-year-old Kamma woman, married Kesavulu, 25, a Dalit man, against the wishes of the former’s parents two years ago. Hemavathi had given birth to a boy just a week before she was murdered.

The couple had settled in a village called Baireddipalle, as they feared their life was under threat from Hemavathi’s family. The woman’s parents had in the past threatened Kesavulu and his family, news reports said.

A week ago, Hemavathi gave birth to a boy. On Friday, she and her husband visited a hospital in Palamaner, where they had gone for a health check up. While they were returning, they were intercepted by Hemavathi’s parents, Y. Bhaskar Naidu and Varalakshmi, and some relatives. According to the New Indian Express, they thrashed Kesavulu, forcefully abducted Hemavathi and left the infant behind.

“They beat me up and abducted her on a two-wheeler. They said that they were taking her to the police station. However, they took her near my home, killed her and threw her in the well,” Kesavulu told mediapersons.

Also Read: ‘Love Will Triumph When Honour Killings Are Prevented. Caste Will Be Annihilated When Love Triumphs’

After the injured Kesavulu reached his village, he informed people about the attack. The police were also informed and a complaint was filed. During a search, police found Hemavathi’s body in a canal. She was severely injured, and police suspect that she was thrashed with sticks before being killed.

The woman’s family is absconding. Their house was ransacked and a two-wheeler was set on fire, apparently by members of Kesavulu’s family. Police have rushed additional forces to Usarapenta vilage, and a police picket has been set up.

Based on a complaint filed by Kesavulu, a case has been registered under the SC, ST (Prevention of Atrocities) Act and various sections of the IPC. Search teams are on the lookout for all those accused in the crime, police said.
