Shrimati democracy: Hurray for the highest number of women MPs, in the 17th Lok, sorry Mahila Sabha

Sagarika Ghose has been a journalist for over three decades, starting her career with The Times of India, subsequently moving to Outlook magazine and The Indian Express. She has been a primetime news anchor and has also worked as Consulting Editor, The Times Of India. She is also a political commentator on the news channel ET Now. Ghose is the author of the best selling biography of Indira Gandhi, "Indira, India's Most Powerful Prime Minister." She is the author of the recently published theoretical work, “Why I Am A Liberal”. LESS ... MORE

TMC MP Mahua Moitra recently made headline news in India and in the international media when she delivered a rousing speech in Parliament. “The House belongs to the opposition,” cried the honourable member. “There is no room for professional hecklers in this great hall,” quoth she, as she proceeded to list the early signs of fascism rising in India. The MP warned against government dominance, but for those moments it was she who was dominant.

The sight of the young sari clad member from Krishnanagar, on her feet and roaring for the Constitution made us sigh in admiration and thank our stars for Shrimati Democracy. No surprises of course that she happens to be Bengali because it is after all in Kolkata where they sometimes chant, ‘Jai Kali Kalkatte wali’. Kolkata’s deity is Rokhha Kali (Kali the Protector) so if democracy is in danger naturally it’s the multi-tasking four-armed women who must storm into the fray. Visit the temple in Kalighat and see the goddess’s formidably fierce golden tongue and you’ll realise that Mahakali has not been known either to be tongue-tied or to hold her tongue, but instead to be always sharp-tongued.

The 17th Lok Sabha has the highest number of women MPs, 78 to be precise. That’s why it should also be referred to as the mahila sabha in addition to being called the Lok Sabha. Not that India’s women parliamentarians are not man enough, because while watching them in action it’s time to say, stand up and be a woman!

BJP’s Sushma Swaraj may have been on mute mode in government but in Parliament her eloquence blazed as bright as her sindoor as she held the House spellbound. That was when UPA was in power and it was clear that lo and behold the opposition was a woman.

Indira Gandhi as MP may have been called a ‘goongi gudiya’ at first but soon male MPs were so much in awe that she was dubbed ‘Abhinav Chandi Durga’. Then there was the doughty Renuka Chowdhary who laughed so loudly during the PM’s speech that she seemed to have had the last laugh.

These days the media is transfixed by newly elected TMC MPs, Nusrat Jahan and Mimi Chakraborty who show that women MPs can not only deliver an earful they can also be a sight for sore eyes. That’s why governments must watch out when Shakti sits in Parliament.

Facebook Twitter Linkedin Email Disclaimer This article is intended to bring a smile to your face. Any connection to events and characters in real life is coincidental.
