Giant 'Jurassic Park' dinosaurs are coming to Chester Zoo this Summer

Something went wrong, please try again later.

How's parenting in a pandemic going for your family? Sign up for relatable tales as we share our unfiltered parenting reality with you, plus useful tips.

Chester Zoo has announced its 2019 calendar which includes major plans for new habitats and visitor experiences this year.

The programme includes the arrival of previously unseen species at the zoo and exciting events such as the Predators experience that will bring ‘Jurassic Park’ dinosaurs to life.

New animals will be in the zoo’s major new Madagascar habitat when it opens to the public this Easter.

The multi-million pound investment in new animal habitats is part of a major long-term plan to transform the zoo into spectacular zones, inspired by the global regions where the zoo’s conservationists work.

Jamie Christon, Chief Operating Officer at Chester Zoo, said: "There are plenty more experiences to inspire learning and play in 2019.

"With more than 20,000 animals, you might think there’s little you can’t already see at Chester Zoo, but in 2019 we’ll also be bringing you life-sized animatronic re-creations of extinct predators, ranging across 200 million years of history.

"And before all this, the zoo will become over-run with Lego animals.

"We were humbled to greet more visitors in 2018 than at any time in Chester Zoo’s long history. Every person through our gates helps to prevent extinction by supporting our vital work as a conservation charity. We look forward to welcoming each and every visitor back again in 2019."

Here is what’s taking place in Chester Zoo this year:

Lego: Big Cats

Wednesday, February 13 – Tuesday, April 30

The world’s biggest felines – from lions to tigers, cheetahs and leopards -spectacularly constructed from thousands of LEGO bricks! A major exhibition of 12 life-sized big cats will be joined by a host of other specially created LEGO animals on public display for the first time.

Families are invited to explore a trail through the zoo, marvel at the big cats display, have a go at creating their own animal models, and join the Zoo Rangers to discover more about big cats.

Madagascar

From Easter 2019

Madagascar is home to stunning wildlife found nowhere else on Earth. Five percent of the worlds’ animal and plant species are only found on the island.

Chester Zoo’s major new Madagascar zone will bring wildlife conservation to life through detailed recreations of stunning forest habitats for visitors to explore. Visitors will be able to take a true expedition through the forest.

Walking among rare lemurs and spot the mysterious fossa, Madagascar’s largest carnivore.

Predators

May – September 2019

Spanning more than 200 million years of history, huge life-sized animatronic hunters will be on display at Chester Zoo throughout summer 2019.

These enormous, long extinct mega-beasts include everything from dinosaurs to a giant bear and unimaginable sea creatures.

With so many animals today threatened with extinction, this exhibition could not come at a more relevant time.

Asiatic Lions

From Autumn 2019

From autumn 2019, visitors will discover an expansive new habitat for the zoo’s endangered Asiatic lions.

Inspired by the dry forest and savannah habitats of Gir National Park in India, the only place in the world where Asiatic lions still range, the new area has been specially created by the zoo’s conservationists, who are caring for the species as part of a European endangered species breeding programme.
