Chennai bus strike: MTC employees go on a flash strike, commuters left in a lurch as bus services affected

Bus strike in Chennai today: Buses stayed off the roads after MTC employees called for a flash strike. (Pic credit: Twitter/@imRahulSihmar) | Photo Credit: Twitter

Key Highlights MTC employees called for flash strike on Monday morning Strike has been called over alleged non-payment of salaries Commuters faced inconvenience as majority of buses stayed off roads

Chennai: A flash strike by the employees of the Metropolitan Transport Corporation (MTC) early on Monday morning caused bus services to be affected in Chennai, much to the inconvenience of thousands of commuters in the city.

The drivers and conductors associated with opposition unions went on a flash strike earlier today over non-payment of salary.

The MTC employees have claimed that authorities had not credited their monthly salary in their bank accounts. As a result, drivers and conductors announced that they would not operate buses from the terminals, The Times of India reported.

Bus services from several bus depots in the city, including Ambattur, Avadi, Poonamallee, Anna Nagar West and Iyyappanthangal, were non-operational today owing to the strike.

The transport services in the western sector bore the maximum brunt because of the strike as school, college and office-going commuters had to board the already crowded suburban trains plying towards Chennai Beach and Moore Market Complex railway stations, The Hindu reported.

As per the daily, a large crowd of commuters initially waited at the Avadi bus depot. However, as bus services remained suspended, many later took the electrical multiple unit (EMU) services, which are generally crowded during the peak hours.

Meanwhile, Tamil Nadu Transport Minister M.R. Vijaybhaskar has reportedly claimed that the salaries of the employees would be credited by Monday evening. Authorities have also said that the issue would be resolved soon, reports stated.

Notably, a senior official of the State Transport Department told The Hindu that the flash strike was called based on a rumour that only a part of the salary would be paid to the employees. The official clarified that the full salary could not be credited as June 30 was a Sunday.

As the day progressed, the strike had been called off at some depots, according to the report. However, buses were yet to ply from termini such as Ambattur, Poonamallee, and Anna Nagar West.
