Endangered and rare tortoise found for the first time in India

LUCKNOW: A critically endangered and rare, Impressed Tortoise (Manouria impressa), has been found in India for the first time, in the forest of Arunachal Pradesh . A male and a female were caught by hunter gatherers (that’s how tribal are called locally) at a height of about 2000 metres near Subansiri river in the state.But, it was for the presence of the range officer of the area, Bunty Tao, at the place and at that time that rare two were rescued. Turtle Survival Alliance-India (TSA-India), director, Shailendra Singh, said, “Tao sent us the pictures of the tortoise. We sent our team to Arunachal and we got to know that these were the rare tortoise who were found for the first time in the country. We had no recorded presence of the specie in India so far.”The two were found on June 19 in Arunachal. Both specimens were examined, marked and photographed before being sent to the Itanagar zoo. The two will further be examined for their health.Impressed tortoise is medium-sized growing up to 31-33cm in length. It inhabits hilly regions, moist primary forest hill tracts of the Indo-Burma hot-spot (Cambodia, China, Laos, Malaysia Myanmar , Thailand, and Vietnam ). It’s habitat is difficult to access and that makes its protection tough.The last reported range extension of the species was from Gwa, Myanmar. The records of IUCN (International Union for Conservation of Nature) show it to be fungivorous (fungi-eating). It is also considered a difficult specie for captive breeding. The clucth size (number of eggs laid at a time) is 10-21 eggs and not much is known of its nesting behaviour.TSA has now sought permission from the centre and state governments of Arunachal Pradesh, Mizoram and Manipur for extensive search of about three rare tortoise species that might be present in the region. “We will interview locals with a hope that it will lead us to an ecologically viable population of the species in the area,” said the director.With this discovery, India becomes the third most turtle-rich country in the world. There are 24 turtles (aquatic) species and, now five, tortoise (terrestrial) species found in the country.
