Mamata Banerjee has all capabilities to be PM: HD Kumaraswamy

Kumaraswamy used Saturday's rally as an example of Banerjee's willingness to "make compromises" to fight. (Photo: PTI)

West Bengal Chief Minister Mamata Banerjee has all the capabilities of leading the country, Karnataka CM HD Kumaraswamy said, days after attending a rally in Kolkata where leaders of most of the country's Opposition parties came together on a single stage.

While praising Mamata Banerjee's leadership abilities, HD Kumaraswamy steered clear of speculating on whether a united Opposition would pick one leader as the prime ministerial candidate for the upcoming Lok Sabha election.

"It is not necessary to select a leader before the elections," Kumaraswamy said as he explained how "deciding on the leadership is not a criterion to win the polls".

"People of the country are totally disappointed with the administration of Narendra Modi. Several states have their own problems. It is not necessary to select a leader before the elections," Kumaraswamy said in an interview to news agency PTI.

Kumaraswamy said that Opposition parties "effective leaders, who can move in a big way for the development of the country". These leaders "can make headway in areas where the previous governments have failed", Kumaraswamy also said.

"But," Kumaraswamy added, "We can sit and select our leader after the elections are over."

Kumaraswamy then went on to praise the leadership skills of Mamata Banerjee, who had organised the United India Rally held on Saturday (January 19).

"She (Mamata) is simplest of the simple and a very good administrator. I believe that Mamata ji has all the capabilities of leading the country. And she has already proved herself by leading West Bengal for so many years," Kumaraswamy said.

Kumaraswamy used Saturday's rally as an example of Banerjee's willingness to "make compromises" to fight the ruling Bharatiya Janata Party.

"Mamata ji did a great job in organizing the rally," Kumaraswamy said. "She had even requested the Left [which has been a historical rival of Mamata's Trinamool Congress] to join her. This shows her generosity in her tactics in fighting the BJP government. She is ready to make compromises to take our fight to the next level."

Kumaraswamy's comments praising Mamata Banerjee come as the stage is slowly set for the general elections. Prime Minister Narendra Modi will be seeking a second term in office and Opposition parties have been making noises about banding together and fighting Modi's BJP together.

However, until now Opposition parties have not revealed a set plan of how they intend to fight the 2019 Lok Sabha election as one united front.

The BJP has maintained that the Opposition parties' inner rivalries will prevent a "mahagathbandhan" (grand alliance) from forming and critics of the Opposition's attempts to band together point to Uttar Pradesh where the Samajwadi Party and Bahujan Samaj Party have kept the Congress out of their alliance.

Another factor that can prevent a grand alliance from forming is the various leaders' personal ambitions to become the Prime Minister of India. Parties have shied away from projecting their leaders as prime ministerial candidates and the constant refrain among the various units is that a leader for a united Opposition will be decided after the elections.
