Beyond Akash Vijayvargiya: When PM Modi reprimanded BJP leaders

Prime Minister Narendra Modi with Union Home Minister Amit Shah. The two leaders have a hard time in disciplining motormouth party leaders in past five years. (Photo: PTI)

Reprimanding BJP's first-time MLA Akash Vijayavargiya over assault on a Madhya Pradesh government official, Prime Minister Narendra Modi today gave a stern warning to the party leaders saying, "Manmaani nahi chalegi (no one can get away doing whatever one wishes)."

Akash is the son of powerful BJP leader Kailash Vijayavargiya, considered to be the architect of party's surprising performance in West Bengal in the Lok Sabha election. But Modi's message was clearly worded. He said, "Whoever it may be, whoever's son he may be... such arrogance, misbehaviour cannot be tolerated."

This is not the first time when Modi has come down heavily on a BJP leader for unruly behaviour or unsavoury comments.

Giriraj Singh

Giriraj Singh, the Union minister, has been a known motormouth and was first to be cautioned and then reprimanded by Narendra Modi and also Amit Shah. In the run up to 2014 Lok Sabha election, Giriraj Singh, who hails from Bihar, had at an election rally in Godda, Jharkhand said the critics of Narendra Modi should go to Pakistan.

Narendra Modi had conveyed strong displeasure. His message was then conveyed to Giriraj Singh by Rajnath Singh, who was the party president at the time.

Giriraj got another reprimand only last month when he taunted BJP's ally and Bihar Chief Minister Nitish Kumar over an iftaar party. Nitish Kumar and Union minister Ram Vilas Paswan had hosted an iftaar party in Patna. The photograph made to news media.

Giriraj Singh tagged photograph from the Iftaar party on Twitter and wrote, "This photo would have been more beautiful, had the same enthusiasm been shown in organising gathering during Navratras. Why do we lag behind on our religion, and stay ahead at show off?"

This came only days after Narendra Modi sworn in as the prime minister for the second term and followed his advice that ruling party leaders should refrain from making controversial remarks. Modi had also added "sabka vishwas" to his "sabka saath, sabka vikas" slogan in his first address to the newly elected MPs of the NDA.

Giriraj Singh was reprimanded again. Amit Shah, the long-time political enforcer of Narendra Modi, spoke to Giriraj Singh and asked him to mind his words.

Manohar Lal Khattar

In 2015, Haryana Chief Minister Manohar Lal Khattar had said in an interview that "Muslims can live here but in this country, they will have to stop eating beef." This comment came in the backdrop of the lynching of Akhlaq in Uttar Pradesh's Dadri over rumour about him eating and possessing beef in his home.

Khattar also said, "The cow is a matter of faith in this country. Muslims can live without beef, can't they?" This was also the time when cow vigilantes were regularly making news for attacking people, especially from the Muslim community, if caught transporting bovine.

Modi had again expressed his displeasure over the remarks made by Khattar, who got an earful from Amit Shah. Modi later called "self-proclaimed cow vigilantes" as anti-social elements who needed to be dealt with sternly in accordance with law.

Sadhvi Pragya

Pragya Singh Thakur, MP from Bhopal and an accused in Malegaon blast case, had during the Lok Sabha election praised Nathuram Godse, the man who assassinated Mahatma Gandhi in 1948. Pragya Singh Thakur described Godse as a "patriot".

She was reprimanded by Modi and the BJP leadership for her statement and was forced to issue apology for insulting Mahatma Gandhi.

Modi, in an interview, said he would not "forgive" Pragya Singh Thakur for her statement. He said, "I will never be able to forgive Pragya Thakur for insulting Mahatma Gandhi." When the two leaders came face to face for the first time after Lok Sabha election, Modi did not respond to Namaste by the controversial MP.

Anant Hegde

Anant Hegde is considered as the next big BJP leader from Karnataka and was a minister in the previous Modi government. He was dropped from the cabinet following his support to Pragya Singh Thakur over praise for Godse.

Supporting Thakur, Hegde wrote on Twitter, "[I] am glad that 7 decades later today's generation debates in a changed perceptional environment and gives good scope for the condemned to be heard upon. #NathuramGodse would have finally felt happy with this debate!"

In another remark, Hegde had said Congress president Rahul Gandhi was a "hybrid specimen" - a son of a Muslim father and a Christian mother - who calls himself a Brahmin.

Modi dropped him from the cabinet and the sources inside the party said the prime minister was not happy with the fact that Hegde refused to mend his ways despite getting reprimand from the leadership.

Maneka Gandhi

Maneka Gandhi, the women and child development minister in the previous Modi government, stirred a controversy during Lok Sabha election saying, "If my victory has to happen without the Muslims, I won't feel good. Dil khatta ho jata hai (Things go sour). Then when a Muslim comes to me for some work, I think there's no point."

The Election Commission temporarily banned Maneka Gandhi from campaigning. Maneka Gandhi won from the Sultanpur Lok Sabha seat but lost her seat in the Modi cabinet. Insiders said she was dropped for her controversial comment.
