Sri Lanka arrests ex-police chief, former defence secy

vermaajay1968@gmail.com

Colombo, July 2

Sri Lanka’s ex-defence secretary Hemasiri Fernando and suspended police chief Pujith Jayasundera were arrested on Tuesday, a day after the Attorney General instructed the authorities to charge them for their failure to prevent the Easter terror attacks that claimed 258 lives.

Jayasundera and Fernando were suspended by President Maithripala Sirisena for their alleged inaction on the intelligence shared by India, which warned of an impending attack by Islamic militants, and thereby, failing to prevent the serial blasts on April 21.

Police Spokesperson Ruwan Gunasekara said that both men were at different hospitals undergoing treatment when police arrested them.

Jayasundara was arrested from the Police Hospital while Fernando was taken into custody at the Colombi National Hospital. Both were scheduled to appear before the CID.

In a letter to acting police chief Chandana Wickremaratne, Attorney General Dappula de Livera on Monday said the duo should be tried for “grave crimes against humanity” for their failure to prevent the Easter Sunday bombings.

De Livera also slammed Wickremeratne for not taking any action against the two as directed earlier on June 27. Wickremaratne’s inaction was of a serious nature, he said.

Sirisena had appointed a three-member panel to probe the negligence by the top officials despite the availability of intelligence inputs on the impending attacks.

Both Jayasundera and Fernando have testified before an ongoing parliamentary probe panel on the attacks. Both of them claimed that there was discounting of the seriousness of the threat at the very highest level. Sirisena is the minister-in-charge of defence. — PTI



Bombings happened despite repeated alerts

Pujith Jayasundara and Hemasiri Fernando are the first two state officials to be arrested for allegedly failing to prevent the Easter Sunday attacks, claimed by the Islamic State

The bombings took place despite repeated warnings from Indian intelligence that an attack was imminent

President Maithripala Sirisena has accused Fernando and Jayasundara of failing to act on an April 4 intelligence report about the April 21 bombings

Duo’s allegations against Prez Sirisena
