Hauz Qazi clashes: Home minister reprimands Delhi Police chief; prayers offered at vandalised temple

Prayers offered at temple in Hauz Qazi | Photo Credit: ANI

Key Highlights PIL filed in Delhi HC over Hauz Qazi communal clash Home Minister Amit Shah reprimands Delhi Police commissioner Prayers offered at vandalised temple

New Delhi: Union Home Minister Amit Shah on Wednesday summoned Delhi Police Commissioner Amulya Patnaik in connection with the communal clashes that took place in central Delhi's Hauz Qazi area on Sunday evening. Sources said the Home Minister reprimanded the Delhi Police chief over delayed action in the matter.

Briefing reporters after the meeting, Patnaik said he had briefed the minister. "I have briefed him about the situation here. Things are now normal in the Hauz Qazi area. Four people have been arrested," he said.

The development came as a public interest litigation (PIL) was filed in the Delhi High Court seeking a court-monitored probe by a Special Investigation Team (SIT) into the communal clashes in central Delhi area.

Petitioner Alok Srivastava moved the court demanding a probe by the SIT to find out whether there was a deep-rooted conspiracy to inflame tensions and spread communal disharmony. The petitioner also sought an investigation to find out any lapses by the Delhi Police.

The PIL was filed as prayers were offered on Wednesday at a temple in Hauz Qazi area of Chawri Bazar which was vandalised during the clashes on Sunday night.

The temple incident happened after groups belonging to two different communities clashed over a parking issue in the locality.

Delhi: Prayers being offered at the temple in Hauz Qazi area, which was vandalised on 30 June after a clash broke out between two groups over parking in the locality on the day. pic.twitter.com/f1aDx15dju — ANI (@ANI) July 3, 2019

Union Minister and Chandni Chowk MP Dr Harsh Vardhan, under whose constituency the affected area comes, had visited the locality on Tuesday and warned of strict action against miscreants.

Later in the day, the Delhi Police arrested three persons, including a minor, for their alleged involvement in the vandalisation of the temple.

Also on Tuesday evening, members of the two communities met in the presence of police and agreed to work to defuse tensions and restore normalcy. They said markets would open on Wednesday in the Chawri Bazar area.

Jamshed Siddiqui said, "We have spoken to each other on the issue and decided that the 'aman committee' (peace committee) would bear the expenses to renovate the vandalised temple."

"We want peace in the area as it was earlier. We condemn the incident and the culprits, who have vandalised the temple, must be punished," he added.

Another person, Bittoo, who also attended the meeting, said, "People from both the communities have been living here happily for many decades. The markets will open on Wednesday and locals will bring back peace with the help of each other."

"In the meeting, it has been decided that the culprits must be punished. Everybody will live peacefully and the market will be opened from Wednesday," Deputy Commissioner of Police (Central) Mandeep Singh Randhawa said.

The trigger of the communal tension was a quarrel between one Sanjeev Gupta and Aas Mohammad over the parking of a scooter outside the former’s building.

Gupta said Mohammad had parked his scooter outside the residential building and was told to remove it as the commonly-used path that was getting blocked. He left the place and came back with several people.

"Thereafter, he, along with other persons, who were drunk, started beating me. In the meantime, I called the police and narrated them the incident. Police took me and Aas Mohammad to a police station where the issue of the scuffle was resolved," Gupta said.

"I just want those who vandalised the temple to renovate it and help everyone to maintain peace in the locality as it was earlier," he said.

Shahi Imam of Fateh Puri Masjid, Mufti Mukarram Ahmad, condemned the incident.

"The act is condemnable and no one has the right to vandalise or hurt the religious sentiment of any person. The RWA of Lal Kuan area would bear the expense of the temple and I appeal to the locals to help each other in maintaining peace. Please do not believe in the rumours," the Shahi Imam said.
