Karnataka JD(S) chief’s meeting with BJP leaders in Delhi raises eyebrows

The Janata Dal Secular (JD-S) State president AH Vishwanath’s meeting with a few Karnataka BJP leaders in New Delhi has raised many eyebrows and has sparked concerns over the survival of the JD(S)-Congress coalition government in the State.

Vishwanath, a former Congress man who joined JD(S) in 2017, on Wednesday had breakfast with a few BJP State leaders.

The breakfast meeting was attended by BJP MP BY Raghavendra — son of Karnataka BJP president and Opposition leader in the Assembly BS Yeddyurappa.

Downplays meeting

Addressing reporters in New Delhi after the meeting, Vishwanath downplayed it and said, “I did not meet anyone, they came to meet me. And just because I met BJP leaders doesn’t mean I am joining the party. No one has invited me to join the BJP. If I have to quit the JD(S), I will inform everybody before I do.”

Speculation is rife that the JD(S) president is upset over his exclusion from the recent Cabinet expansion, which included even Independent MLA R Shankar, who belongs to his Kuruba (shepard) community.

Immediately after the meeting, the JD(S) rushed its lone Member of Parliament, Prajwal Revanna (grandson of JD(S) supremo HD Deve Gowda) to pacify Vishwanath.

Prajwal described Vishwanath as a person with ‘ocean of knowledge’ and vast experience.

He also appealed Vishwanath to continue as the JD(S) State president. Reportedly, Vishwanath also appreciated Prajwal’s speech in Parliament and advised him to be punctual not only to the session but also to the Library in Parliament.

Post Lok Sabha election in May, Vishwanath was in news for calling upon another Congress man — V Srinivas Prasad (who had joined BJP).

The veteran politicians had reportedly discussed the political developments in the State then. However, both Srinivas Prasad and Vishwanath claimed it was a courtesy call as both of them served in the Congress earlier.

Vishwanath, who joined the JD(S) in 2017, had said they are friends for the past four decades and it was a causal meeting. “When two politicians meet, obviously, we discuss about politics. But there is nothing special about the meeting,” he had said.

Two Congress MLAs had resigned from their Assembly seat on Monday, threatening the survival of the JD(S)-Congress coalition government in the State.
