CFMoto cancels launch event scheduled for July 4

CFMoto has cancelled the launch of its motorcycles scheduled for tomorrow due to the flooding of various parts of Mumbai. It may be noted that the launch event was scheduled in Mumbai, where heavy rains have wreaked havoc in the city from the start of July and according to the IMD (Indian Meteorological Department), there is no possibility of rains dying down anytime soon.

IMD has warned of ‘heavy’ to ‘extremely heavy’ rainfall in Mumbai over the next two days. While this has pushed the company to cancel the launch event, it is yet to announce a new date for the launch of the motorcycles. CFMoto was scheduled to launch 4 motorcycles on July 4, 2019.

The first of the 4 new models would have been CFMoto 300NK, which is powered by a single cylinder 292.4cc mill. This fuel injected DOHC mill can produce 34 PS of power and 20.5 Nm of torque. Suspension duties are overseen by upside down forks up front and a monoshock in the rear. Besides that, the CFMoto 300NK gets an LED headlamp, TFT instrumentation and dual riding modes.

Another motorcycle that was scheduled to launch tomorrow is the CFMoto 650NK, a middleweight street-naked motorcycle. At the heart of the bike is a 649.3cc inline, twin cylinder mill. The DOHC engine produces 70.7 PS of power and 62 Nm of torque. The suspension setup is a standard telescopic fork in the front sourced from KYB. Other features include an LED headlamp and Metzeler tyres.

Besides that, AMW Motorcycles was also scheduled to launch the CFMoto 650MT which shares its powerplant with the naked sibling. The bike gets upside down fork upfront with adjustable preload and is focused towards multi-terrain riding. The last motorcycle to be launched was the CFMoto 650GT, a tourer centric version. The bike has a 5-inch TFT instrumentation with self-adjusting backlight. It also gets a manually adjustable windshield. Apart from this, the 650GT gets standard telescopic fork sourced from KYB, and dual riding modes.

Also Read: Exclusive: CFMoto 300SR to be launched in India in mid-2020

The company initially targets sale of 10,000 motorcycles annually. The company will also introduce BS-VI compliant models by the end of December 2019.
