Nifty, Sensex Trending Up – Wednesday closing report

We had mentioned in Tuesday’s closing report that Nifty, Sensex headed higher. The major indices of Indian equity markets were range bound on Wednesday and closed with gains. On the NSE, there were 956 advances, 771 declines and 362 unchanged.

Sensex opened on a positive note during the morning session of the trade and soon entered the negative range. Bank shares were trading with gains in Wednesday's morning session. Shares of YES Bank, Adani Power, Vodafone Idea, Ashok Leyland, Bank of Baroda, PNB, Indiabulls Housing Finance, ITC, SAIL and JSPL were among the most traded shares on the NSE.

Indiabulls Housing Finance said it is buying back NCDs maturing in September worth Rs1,375 crore and rupee denominated bonds maturing in October worth Rs 1,330 crore. The NBFC said it is going for early redemption of non-convertible debentures (NCDs) and masala bonds (rupee denominated bonds) on the back of strong cash position of the company. The NCDs maturing in September include Rs660 crore of public issues. The stock shot up 7.67% today.

The US Food and Drug Administration (USFDA) has issued a warning letter to Aurobindo Pharma on its unit XI. ''Because your methods, facilities, or controls for manufacturing, processing, packing, or holding do not conform to CGMP, your API are adulterated’’ the US Regulator said in its warning letter sent to the company. The warning letter is centered on the issue of the manufacture of Valsartan API. The stock was down 2.42%.

Drug firm Zydus Cadila received the final nod from the US health regulator to market its generic Misoprostol tablets used for preventing stomach ulcers. The drug will be manufactured at the group's formulations manufacturing facility at SEZ, Ahmedabad, it added.

ICICI Bank has tied up with non-banking financial company IndoStar Capital for vehicle financing for small and medium fleet owners to buy new as well as old commercial vehicles. Under this partnership, IndoStar will originate and service the customers through the entire loan life-cycle including sourcing, documentation, collection and loan servicing, ICICI Bank said in a release.

The top gainers and top losers of the major indices are given in the table below:

The closing values of the major Asian indices are given in the table below:
