23 swept away as dam in Ratnagiri breaches; villagers say they had warned authorities two days ago

Ratnagiri district

heavy rainfall

The Tiware dam in Chiplun tehsil of Ratnagiri district has a storage capacity of 20 lakh cubic metres. It developed a breach late on Tuesday. A total of 12 bodies have been recovered

Water Resources Minister Girish Mahajan

Those rescued were given shelter at a school. (Right) Minister Girish Mahajan ordered a probe and said houses will be rebuilt in 4 months

All his life savings had gone into building home

Arun Pujari

Ratnagiri dam was repaired just a month ago but fresh cracks had developed, villagers said they had warned authorities two days ago.A dam in Chiplun tehsil of, around 300 km from Mumbai, that had developed cracks a month ago breached late on Tuesday during, sweeping away 23 residents. Twelve bodies were recovered; 11 others were still missing at the time of going to press. Eleven houses, too, were washed away.Those who managed to escape in the nick of time were given shelter at a nearby school.Tiware is located on hill surrounded by lush, green mountains from three sides. The dam helps restrict the flow of water coming down the mountains.Villagers of Bhendwadi said temporary repairs were carried out at the dam—built in 2004 by a company owned by local Shiv Sena MLA Sadanand Chavan—a month ago, but fresh cracks had cropped up. They said they had warned local authorities just the day before tragedy struck.Two boys said they watched the water level of the dam rise as rain pounded the village—but the authorities allegedly issued no warning— and that the structure breached around 9.30 pm. It was the villagers themselves who raised an alarm, they said.Hira Kanvaje, 40, who was doing the dishes outside her house a few metres from the dam, said her son Tushar alerted her to the increasing water level. “I ran inside and asked the others to leave immediately. Our family of five was saved, but many people were washed away. The currents were so strong there is nothing left there now,” she said.Some residents like Ajit Chavan and Tanaji Chavan lost their entire families. The Chavans, who lost four members each to the gushing waters, were shifted to the neighbouring village.Rohini Gaikwad, 35, alleged that the entire village had been swept away. “I was in Chiplun when I heard about the breach. The village has no mobile connectivity and I was not able to contact anyone. I spent the whole night worrying about my family. I rushed to the village early on Wednesday and found that my family was safe. But there wasn’t a house standing. We lost everything.”Ashwini Gorke, 41, who was at the shelter on Wednesday, said her mother Jankibai had a narrow escape. “The villagers had complained about the cracks in the dam. But the authorities did not pay attention. Who is going to compensate us now? We lost everything to the flood. There has to be some action against the MLA who constructed the dam.”visited the site on Wednesday and ordered up an inquiry through a special investigation team led by a senior government official. The team will also question Chavan, the minister said. Mahajan announced compensation of Rs 5 lakh for the deceased and reconstruction of houses in four months.Mirror reached out to Chavan but he refused to comment.-------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------Arun Pujari, 60, put all his savings into building a house in January last year. Most of the house has now collapsed. “My wife and I were inside our home when we heard screams. On coming out, we saw we were surrounded by water. We could not leave the house. But we had to leave as the water level rose. All of my savings have been reduced to mere dirt. We have nothing except the clothes on our backs,” said Pujari, who retired from the consumer court in Mumbai.
