A small group of protesters smashed their way

A small group of protesters smashed their way into Hong Kong's legislature in unprecedented scenes of chaos that escalated tensions over the Chinese territory's political future. It came the same day that hundreds of thousands joined a peaceful annual pro-democracy march in the former British colony.

Police firing tear gas evicted the protesters and after midnight, hundreds of police secured the building following a warning to protesters to clear it. Activists had occupied the Legislative Council (LegCo) building for hours after breaking away from a protest on the anniversary of Hong Kong's transfer of sovereignty to China from Britain.

World leaders attending a Group of 20 summit in Japan clashed over values that have served for decades as the foundation of their cooperation as they face calls to fend off threats to economic growth. "A free and open economy is the basis for peace and prosperity," Japanese Prime Minister Shinzo Abe told his counterparts in opening the two-day G-20 meeting in Osaka, which came as leaders grapple with profound tensions over trade, globalization and the collapsing nuclear deal with Iran.

A consensus emerged among observers that Vladimir Putin 'stole the show'. Donald Trump took the opportunity on an adjoining South Korean leg of his trip to make history as the first US president to step into North Korea with his 'friend' Kim Jong-un, after tweeting him from the G20 to meet at the Demilitarized Zone between the two Koreas.

Crude oil prices fell despite Russia agreeing to a plan to extend the current production cuts with its OPEC allies for longer than analysts expected. OPEC and nonmembers also agreed on a charter to formalize longer term cooperation. Saudi Energy Minister Khalid al Falih said the charter would provide a "a structure for technical meetings, ministry meetings, regular summits."

OPEC and nonmembers, in a coalition called OPEC+, agreed to extend its current 1.2 million barrels per day output cuts for another nine months, to the end of March. Analysts had expected a six-month extension heading into an OPEC meeting that took place at its headquarters in Vienna. But crude oil prices rose modestly as OPEC members and Russia signaled support for extending crude oil production cuts into early 2020.

At least 18 people were killed in Mumbai as a wall collapsed following the heaviest monsoon rains in a decade, that brought chaos to India's financial capital and surrounding areas. Scores more were injured when the structure came down in a slum, according to disaster management officials for Mumbai's local authority.

The tragedy came as the teeming coastal settlement of 20 million residents was lashed by heavy rains for a second consecutive day, bringing the city to a virtual standstill. Schools and colleges were closed while more than 100 flights were either cancelled or diverted from Mumbai airport. The airport's main runway was shut after a SpiceJet plane carrying 167 passengers and crew overshot the runway.
