Erdogan FURY at US refusal to deliver F-35s – ‘It’s a robbery!’

Turkey: NATO ‘concerned’ over Russian missile system purchase

top stories direct to your inbox SUBSCRIBE Invalid email Sign up to receive our rundown of the day'sdirect to your inbox We use your sign-up to provide content in ways you've consented to and to improve our understanding of you. This may include adverts from us and 3rd parties based on our understanding. You can unsubscribe at any time. More info

US officials said that the White House still plans to remove Turkey from the F-35 fighter jet programme if Ankara goes through with purchasing Russian S-400 missiles, which are set to arrive within days. Washington also plans to impose sanctions on various firms and expel any Turkish pilots from a training programme held in the US. This was met by a furious response from Mr Erdogan, who said his country had already paid $1.4billion for the planes.

He said: “If you have a customer and that customer is making payments like clockwork, how can you not give that customer their goods? “The name of that would be robbery.” Four jets have already changed hands between the two, with up to 32 Turkish pilots and aircraft workers being trained in the US. The Turkish President insisted that, regardless of the deal, his nation were integral to producing the F-35s. He added: “We have made an agreement to buy 116 F-35s.

Trump's promise over no sanctions was contradicted

The S-400 missiles in question

“We are not just a market, we are also joint producers. “We produce some of the parts in Turkey.” The ongoing dispute threatens to rupture relations between the two NATO allies – with US officials fearing that Ankara may grow ever closer to Moscow instead. Erdogan and US President Donald Trump have clashed in recent months over Turkey’s decision to buy Russian S-400 missiles instead of American-made Patriot ones. Washington officials say that the S-400s aren’t compatible with NATO missile systems and, more importantly, leave their own fighter jets open to Russian subterfuge.

Pentagon spokesperson Colonel Mike Andrews said: “Nothing has changed. “Turkey’s purchase of the Russian S-400 air and missile defence system is incompatible with the F-35 programme. Turkey will not be permitted to have both systems.” Optimism over a possible truce initially grew following the G20 summit last weekend. Following private talks with Trump, Mr Erdogan alleged that the US President would never impose punishment on Ankara over the S-400 issue. He said: “In our phone calls when we come together bilaterally, Mr Trump has not said so far: ‘We will impose these sanctions’. “On the S-400s, he said to me: ‘You are right.’ We carried this issue to a very advanced level.

116 F-35 jets were due to be delivered

Trump and Erdogan have usually shared warm relations
