Economic Survey 2018-19: The Missing Nudge

Dheeraj Tiwari is a Senior Assistant Editor with The Economic Times and a firm believer of the Prospect Theory. In his writings he focusses on public policy making and its impact on financial markets. LESS ... MORE

Most of India’s farmers are grappling with the menace of stray cows, and yet people are being lynched in the name of the cow. In a country that contradicts itself at every step, the premise that Behavioural Economics can be the nudge that propels India into a $5 trillion economy is promising yet adventurous.

The Economic Survey for 2018-19 has a chapter on Behavioural Economics that states that when they are rightly tapped, schemes such as Beti Bachao Beti Padhao have been and will be a success. The Survey then goes on to list some areas, including taxation, where this can be more successfully implemented to get desired results.

There is no denying that a ‘nudge’ can help turn mindsets around or bring about the desired behaviour. But when an elected member of state assembly, who also happens to be the son of a senior member of the ruling party, throws caution to the wind and beats an official with a bat, the whole theory of changing the nation with heuristics goes for a toss.

Perhaps what might apply to India is the ‘Availability Heuristic.’ And to break these shackles, we may need an overhaul rather than tinkering through ‘changing the default option’ or ‘repeated reinforcements’, as mentioned in the Economic Survey.

The Survey mentions that it is imbued by the spirit of ‘blue sky thinking’ in deliberating on the appropriate economic model for India. The question, as Subramanian so succinctly puts it, is, ‘When was the last time you looked at the blue, unfettered sky and wondered about the power of the unfettered “blue sky” thinking?’

Is there a space to brainstorm freely, or are behavioural economics in India tied to other issues, just like when some politician referred to a ‘Pink Revolution’ in his election speeches?

It is the ‘horn effect’ which now plagues us, and in the same spirit perhaps it is a tad unjust when the Survey mentions that the earlier attempt to create five-year plans, largely using the equilibrium framework, failed because it was too prescriptive for an inherently unpredictable world.

In 2014-15, under Arvind Subramanian, the Economic Survey had observed: ‘India has reached a sweet spot—rare in the history of nations—in which it could finally be launched on a double-digit medium-term growth trajectory.’

We didn’t have a five-year plan to blame for the dip in the economic growth but this year, the Survey brings us to the same point by starting with, ‘India stands at a historic moment when sustained high economic growth has become a national imperative.’

Facebook Twitter Linkedin Email Disclaimer Views expressed above are the author's own.

END OF ARTICLE
