[NEWSWRAP] News of The Day, July 4, 2019: From Economic Survey 2018-19 to warning on JuD chief Hafiz Saeed

The survey has made a case for increasing private investment. | Photo Credit: BCCL

New Delhi: Thursday saw the Economic Survey 2018-19 being tabled in Parliament and it said that India needs to grow at 8 per cent till FY25 to become $5 trillion economy and Ministry of External Affairs warned India from believing Pakistan's 'cosmetic steps' on its crackdown on Jamaat-ud-Dawa chief and terrorist Hafiz Mohammed Saeed.

MEA warns India over Pak’s crackdown on JuD chief Hafiz Saeed

The Ministry of External Affairs on Thursday warned India from believing Pakistan's 'cosmetic steps' with respect to the Islamic nation's crackdown on Jamaat-ud-Dawa chief and terrorist Hafiz Mohammed Saeed. Pakistan had yesterday Saeed and 12 of his aides, along with four more organisations in Lahore on charges of terror financing. Read More

Economic Survey 2018-19: India needs to grow at 8% till FY25 to become $5 trillion economy

The Economic Survey presented by Finance Minister Nirmala Sitharama in Parliament today said India's economy needs to grow at a sustained rate of 8% till FY 2024-25 to achieve Prime Minister Narendra Modi's target of $5 trillion economy. The survey has made a case for increasing private investment, a key driver of the economy, that drives demand, creates capacity, increases labour productivity, introduces new technology and generate jobs. Focus on policies that nourish MSMEs to create more jobs and become more productive, reduce the cost of capital and rationalize the risk-return trade-off for investments, should be the key ingredients to achieve $5 trillion economy target. Read More

Swara Bhasker and Himashu Sharma part ways after four years of being together?

It seems Swara Bhasker and Himanshu Sharma’s love story has hit a rough patch. Reports suggest that the Bollywood actress and the film writer, who started dating while working on Kangana Ranaut and R Madhavan’s Tanu Weds Manu Returns, have called it quits after being in a relationship for over four years. Read More

Over 9.5 crore toilets built, 564,658 villages declared open defecation free: Economic Survey

According to the survey tabled in Parliament, it was stated that many states in India have achieved 100 per cent open defecation free status and individual household latrine coverage since the launch of Swachh Bharat Mission. The survey further stated that since the launch of the flagship programme in October 2014, over 9.5 crore toilets have been built all over the country and 564,658 villages have been declared open defecation free (ODF). Read More

Scientists eliminate AIDS-causing virus from mice - could a cure for HIV be in sight?

A recent study has revealed that scientists have finally, successfully removed the HIV virus from mice in an attempt to develop a cure for the deadly disease that has affected millions of people around the world, for years. In the first treatment, the researchers employed a long-acting slow-effective release (LASER) form of antiretroviral therapy. The second treatment involved gene editing system called CRISPR-Cas9. While the authors of the study mentioned that the treatment may not produce the same effect in humans, it is still to be tried out. Read More

Xiaomi Redmi 7A launched with a 2-year warranty in India

The Xiaomi Redmi 7A is the latest addition to the company's lineup of budget smartphones. The Redmi 7A arrives with a splashproof coating and a standard 2-year warranty -- instead of the standard 1-year warranty. Similar to other smartphones from Xiaomi, the Redmi 7A comes with P2i nano-coating making its splash resistant. It weighs 150 grams and measures 9.55 thick. The phone also packs a 4000mAh battery. Read More




