Dhanori society fears collapse of its building

Residents recount a host of issues — including the crashing of an office on premises — as a new building is being constructed



The spate of wall collapses in Pune has sent a ripple of caution among people, who are now anxious over the state of their residences and constructions in the vicinity. In Dhanori, such fear reigns high at Mayur Kilbil Co-operative Housing Society, where 150 residents are petrified over the dire state of their building. Its plight has resulted from the pillars that have weakened due to the construction of a new building adjacent to their wing.



The society has two phases — the second one comprising three 11-storied buildings labelled D1, D2 and D3. A property is being developed adjacent to the latter, for which a 30-40 foot crater has been dug. The exit road has been shut for the purpose.



During these developments over last week, when strong winds and heavy rain made its presence felt, the sales office on the premises slid into the crater. A resident of the society Rekha Teli, shared, “Last week, we woke up to loud noise from the construction site. Half the portion of the office had collapsed, putting the labourers in danger. It points to cheap construction material. For instance, the glasses that were fixed on the gallery recently fell down recently. Thankfully, nobody was hurt.”



Now, the residents fear that their entire building might face a similar fate. The parking areas under these buildings are also vulnerable, as the soil has slipped exposing the main pillars.



The deplorable situation is aggravated by the fact that there are no walls or barricades to protect the soil from slipping — a phenomenon that also poses a threat to the road across the trench. A temporary provision in the form on tin shades has been constructed.



The residents first reported the scenario to the fire department, which refused to take any action. When they went for a second time, a fire officer then sent a notice to the developer. They also approached Pune Municipal Corporation (PMC), but to no avail.



Resident Jaykumar Bhattad now feels cheated with no resolution at hand and especially because the developer used cheap construction material beyond their knowledge. “He is playing with our lives. The road provided to us for commuting is not safe as it could collapse any time. Despite bringing this and many other issues to PMC’s notice, not a single officer has taken cognisance,” he added.



The road, according to another residence Nagnath Dhole, is inconvenient as the developer did not lay it from the middle of the buildings as they had demanded. “We have to commute through phase-I, which is around 1.5 km away from our building,” he said, adding that the temporary tin shades have been flying around the premises, where kids often play in the evening.



When the residents reach their buildings after their long detour, they have to think twice before parking. Vishal Zambare said that since the space is close to the crater, it could glide down. “The ground floor and the first-floor parking areas have been affected due to the construction and we fear that it could collapse any time. We have lost out sleep over it,” he added.



When city engineer, Prashant Waghmare, was conveyed of these grievances, he said that the developer must ensure proper safety while constructing the new building inside a pre-existing project. “He should install fences and barricades. We will visit the spot and if we find that the construction is devoid of safety measures, we will initiate action against the developer,” he said.



However, Ritesh Agrawal — who has taken up the construction at the society — denied the allegations, saying that they have thought of people’s safety. “We have closed the road in order to avoid any untoward incident. Proper arrangements have been made so that no resident suffers,” he said.


