Grievances galore at Janaspandana meet; GT Devegowda takes errant officials to task

MYSURU: Since being named the district in-charge minister, GT Devegowda has displayed little to no hesitation in reprimanding officials for their alleged apathy to problems of citizens. It was no different at the ‘ Janaspandana ’ programme held at JK Grounds in the city on Thursday, wherein the minister sat down to listen, and redress the grievances of citizens.Devegowda was particularly unsparing in his criticism of the officials of Mysuru City Corporation (MCC) and Mysore Urban Development Authority (Muda) for their purported failure to provide relevant documents to citizens on time. When one of the residents at the meeting informed the minister that he was yet to receive his ‘Khata (a deed that authenticates ownership of a property)’ for a site allotted four years ago, the minister directed the Muda engineer responsible for distribution of the document to ensure that the deed was issued without delay. Devegowda also warned engineers to act against encroachments across the city, failure to do which, he said would invite stringent action.The programme, which was organised primarily for the benefit of residents in localities under the purview of the MCC, and the Mysuru gram panchayat, was attended by scores of citizens on Thursday. The failure of the officials to attend to civic problems on a timely basis, and the unimpressive performance of those in various departments came into stark relief at the meeting.Eshwar Rao, 79, a resident of NR Mohalla, accompanied by his son-in-law Vasu, was among those who attended the meeting. Despite having undergone two heart surgeries, Rao hobbled into the meeting, where he complained to the minister about a neighbour beginning construction in a plot without receiving approval for the plan from the MCC, besides leaving no buffer space between his structure and the others. Mysuru deputy commissioner Abhiram G Sankar, who was also present at the meeting, directed the authorities concerned to take steps to halt work on the building in question without delay.On hearing about the plight of a 12-year-old boy from an underprivileged family, forced to undergo dialysis on a regular basis, Devegowda directed the Mysuru district health officer Dr R Venkatesh to see to it that the child, Mahadev, could undergo the treatment free of cost. Mahadev’s mother Rajeshwari said that her son was born with just one kidney, and his problem had aggravated four months ago and undergoing dialysis was the only solution. “We initially took him to the Krishna Rajendra (KR) Hospital but the dialysis unit there is not as good as we would like. But private hospitals charge Rs 3,000 per session, and it is very hard for us to afford it,” she said.Meanwhile, BJP leader and Chamaraja MLA L Nagendra, who participated in the session, enjoined on Devegowda to set the process for transfer of officials who had been working at MCC and Muda for more than five years in motion.
