CM Raghubar Das sets July deadline to fix Ranchi power transmission glitches

RANCHI: Chief minister Raghubar Das on Friday told officers of the state energy department that heads will roll if uninterrupted power supply is not ensured for Ranchi as well as for Jharkhand by September.Das reviewed the progress of electrification work underway across the state and other projects of the energy department at the state secretariat. “There should not be any confusion. I want time-bound results, else everyone will be shuffled. Those who are unable to perform will be retired,” he was quoted as saying in a statement issued by the CMO after the meeting.Ranchi and the whole of Jharkhand have been reeling under long hours of power outage since May. On Friday, Das directed officers to fix transmission and other problems in Ranchi by July 31. “The problems in districts have to be fixed in the next three months,” he said. Das also ordered suspension of Dhanbad’s superintendent engineer for going on three-week leave without prior intimation.Later, Das also reviewed the works of state food & civil supplies department and ordered the department to ensure that 14 lakh eligible households, which are yet to get free LPG connection and ovens under the Centre’s Ujjwala Yojana, must be covered by September-end.With the state reporting several cases of alleged hunger deaths, the department had announced earlier that village panchayats and urban local bodies must have a contingency fund of Rs 10,000 for providing foodgrains to families in distress. The CM on Friday said deputy commissioners of each districts will also have a contingency fund of Rs 5 lakh for the same.Another statement, issued by his office, said 22.80 lakh quintal of paddy has been procured by the state from over 32,680 farmers till March. Das also announced that ration dealers will be given Rs 1,000 per month for smooth functioning of the PDS shops. Earlier, the commission for ration dealers for each quintal of foodgrains was revised to Rs 100 from Rs 45.
