SME: Govt needs to focus on agricultural reforms, SMEs to push private investment

New Delhi: Agricultural reforms and the revival of small enterprises will be key to driving private investment even as economists cautioned that an immediate recovery is unlikely.“The global economy has begun to slow down, so growth has to be domestically driven. A fiscal stimulus may not do the trick by itself, but bringing demand up should be the government’s priority,” said former chief statistician Pronab Sen.Consumption demand is going to come from agriculture and micro, small and medium incomes, that is, from the poor, and that should be the focus area.“These two areas particularly need attention because while agriculture is going through a period of deflation, the SME (small and medium enterprises) sector is still broken,” he said.The statistics office has projected gross fixed capital formation growing at 12.2% in FY19 and India Ratings expects it to clock 10.3% in FY20. An Ind-Ra study of the top 200 listed and unlisted non-financial asset-heavy corporates suggests that private sector capex is unlikely to revive before FY21.One of the reasons is low capacity utilisation by India Inc. According to the Reserve Bank of India ( RBI ) quarterly survey of manufacturing companies, capacity utilisation since FY16 has been in the range of 71-75.5%. In the first quarter of FY19, a survey of 850 companies showed capacity utilisation at 73.8%. That needs to pick up substantially before companies start investing in creating new capacities.Government is the only source of large investments but may become constrained by loan waivers, said CARE Ratings chief economist Madan Sabnavis.“So, animal spirits will not work in India and one should focus on a gradual pickup,” he said.Experts said industry needs easier funding and higher manufacturing capacity utilisation. However, they ruled out private investment in textiles, because it already has a bad loan problem, and the power sector as it is already running a surplus.The bankruptcy resolution framework that’s been put in place is still in the process of getting streamlined, said one expert.“The Insolvency and Bankruptcy Code (IBC) has run into a muddle and it is not possible to clear all NPAs (nonperforming assets),” said an economist on condition of anonymity. “There will be a slow pickup in investments as and when the economy grows. We don’t see this happening in FY20.”Sen said that though the government may tell banks to go slow on declaring SMEs as bad assets, a large number have already become NPAs after demonetisation in November 2016 and the rollout of the goods and services tax (GST) in July 2017.“It may be a little late in the day. As for agriculture, public investment is limited to irrigation but one should not expect private investment till the time it assures returns,” he explained.While demonetisation and GST affected growth earlier, investment has also been slowed by the liquidity crunch of the past few months. Elections have added to the uncertainty. Challenging labour reforms are an added deterrent for companies in a low-growth phase and that is when they circumvent rules to hire more contract labour, according to Sabnavis.
