Bomb Hoax: Drunk, lovelorn sales executive sends securitymen at Hyderabad airport on wild goose chase

The sales executive was taken into custody by RGI officials (Representative Image) | Photo Credit: BCCL

Key Highlights The sales executive was immediately taken into custody The Home Minister was due to arrive at RGI on Saturday morning

Hyderabad: A 24-year-old has man was booked by law enforcement agencies in Hyderabad on Friday after he reportedly walked up to security personnel at the city's Rajiv Gandhi International Airport and gave them false information about a bomb threat to two Chennai-bound flights. Identified as KV Vishwanathan, the man works as a sales executive in Secunderabad.

Owing to Home Minister Amit Shah's visit to Hyderabad on Saturday, the timing of the alleged bomb threat triggered panic among security personnel. Bomb disposal squads, police teams, CISF personnel and officials with other agencies rushed to the two flights and carried out a thorough inspection. As a result, they concluded that the threat was a hoax.

Vishawanathan was immediately taken into custody by RGI airport police of Cyberabad Commissionerate in the city. Upon interrogation, he told investigators that he walked up to the central industrial security force (CISF) personnel deployed at the airport and gave them a false tip about an alleged bomb because he was 'heartbroken and drunk'.

Vishwanathan arrived at the RGI airport in the early hours of Saturday and went straight to one of the bars where he reportedly consumed alcohol. He was later walking back to the bar from a smoking zone at around 6 am when he told two CISF personnel that there is a bomb threat to two Chennai-bound flights, Indigo 6E 188 and True Jet 2T 201.

Also Read: Mumbai-based businessman sentenced to life in prison for hoax hijack threat on Delhi-bound Jet Airways flight

The sales executive was himself slated to travel to Chennai onboard Truejet airlines flight number 2T 201. Reports have asserted that he has been working with the same company for over a year and is a frequent flyer. A case of 'Suppression of Unlawful Act Against Safety of Civil Aviation Act' has been slapped against Vishwanathan.

A similar incident had come to light from Hyderabad in April 2017, when a city-based transport agent was arrested after he sent an email to the Mumbai police chief, warning him of possible plane hijacks from Hyderabad, Mumbai and Chennai airports. Motaparthi Vamshi Krishna later revealed to officials that his Chennai-based girlfriend whom he met online wanted to vacation in Goa and had asked him to book the tickets. However, he was low on cash and could not make the bookings, which is when he decided to send the hoax mail in order to delay the plan. A top official with the Commissioner's Task Force had told media outlets at the time that the travel agent even considered creating a fake air ticket for his girlfriend but later abandoned the idea and created a fake email address instead which he used to send out the hoax.
