'REMARKABLE rise of China' to spark Indo-Pacific WAR? - India expert's CHILLING warning

WW3: Indian naval warns of potential conflict

top stories direct to your inbox SUBSCRIBE Invalid email Sign up to receive our rundown of the day'sdirect to your inbox We use your sign-up to provide content in ways you've consented to and to improve our understanding of you. This may include adverts from us and 3rd parties based on our understanding. You can unsubscribe at any time. More info

Nail Jai Singh has warned China’s continuous expansion and dominance in the region could lead to “inevitable competition and possible confrontation”. Over the last two decades China has looked to increase its dominance in Asia. The global power has increased its influence in the South China Sea and is looking to use its growing naval strength to extend its power to the Indian Ocean and into Europe.

Writing on financialexpress.com, Mr Singh said: “The defining feature of the 21st century has been the remarkable rise of China. “While the PLA (Navy) has every right to be in the Indian Ocean in pursuance of protecting its own trade and maritime interests, the quest for resources by both countries will lead to an inevitable competition and possible confrontation. “Furthermore, as the Indo-Pacific also becomes the stage for Cold War 2.0, the first indications of which are discernible already, the presence of other extra-regional powers could inhibit India’s own options. “This is what India would have to guard against and be able to hold its own in the region.” READ MORE: World War 3: CIA insider reveals China’s ‘CHECKMATE’ move to crush US

WW3: Chinese naval expansion

President Xi Jinping wants China to overtake the US as the dominant power in the world. With its economy now the second largest in the world and their navy becoming ever stronger, it looks set to reach its 2049 goal of global dominance. As Mr Singh adds, the Chinese navy has added 150 ships and over 50 submarines in the last two decades and plans to commission 20 ships and submarines every year. China dipped its toes in the Indian Ocean in 2008 as part of its anti-piracy initiative and has now established a port in the “strategically important” Djibouti on the east coast of Africa. READ MORE: WW3 ALERT: Russia sends STERN WARNING to 'stubborn' US

WW3: Xi Jinping's quest for dominance

Mattis told Trump ‘we're trying to prevent WW3’ reveals expert
