Cong, JD(S) in a huddle to save Karnataka govt

Bengaluru: A day after the resignation of over a dozen ruling Congress-JD(S) MLAs rocked the ruling coalition in Karnataka and plunged the state into a political crisis, both parties have gone into a huddle to discuss the next course of action to save the government.

This comes even as opposition BJP said it is keeping a watch on the ongoing developments and indicated that the party was looking at options to form the government.

Rocked by the resignations of ten of its MLAs, Congress Legislature Party leader Siddaramaiah has convened a meeting Tuesday to discuss the ongoing political developments and the assembly session, starting from July 12. In an intimation to Congress MLAs, he has warned that their absence would be viewed seriously. The meeting gains significance amid reports that more legislators are likely to resign in the next couple of days.

Congress leaders, including AICC General Secretary K C Venugopal who has camped here, held a series of meetings on Sunday and strategised the plan of action in a last-ditch effort to save the government. They are also trying to reach out to party MLAs who have resigned and trying to pacify them, sources said, adding that attempts are also being made to contact those whom they suspect are “vulnerable” and may resign.

Siddaramaiah, Deputy Chief Minister G Parameshwara, Minister D K Shivakumar and KPCC Working President Eshwar Khandre are part of the meetings.

Speaking to reporters, Shivakumar said meetings are going on and “we are trying find a medicine and solution” to the current crisis. “I hope that everything will be resolved soon and am ready for any sacrifices to save the government and party.”

Khandre said attempts are on to pacify MLAs and solve the issues that they have. “We are trying to reach out to MLAs directly…There are some minor differences, which are normal. The leadership is trying to sort out them. Everything will be all right, wait and watch,” he said.

The Congress’ high command is said to have questioned state unit leaders about how they had allowed such a large number of them to happen, party sources said. They also specifically asked about the resignations of Byrati Basavaraj (K R Puram),S T Somashekar (Yashwanthpur) and Munirathna (Rajarajeshwaringar), considered close to Siddaramaiah.
