Heavy rainfall affects normal life in Mumbai, flight operations shut at city airport

New Delhi:

Heavy to very heavy rainfall in parts of Mumbai on Monday caused water-logging in several low-lying areas while roads across the city and suburbs were inundated with huge traffic jams. In what could be another big blow to the Mumbaikars, flight movement at the Chhatrapati Shivaji Maharaj International Airport has come to a standstill owing to incessant showers and poor visibility this morning.

Speaking to the media, a Mumbai Airport (MIAL) spokesperson said, "Due to heavy rains, there are no movements at Chhatrapati Shivaji Maharaj International Airport". Though no flight has been cancelled till the time, at least 3 diversions have taken place since morning.

However, the Central Railway locals are running normally all over Mumbai and no disruption has been reported till the time. Taking to Twitter, the Central Railway wrote, "Heavy rains at various locations on Mumbai suburban. Central Railway locals are running normal on main line, harbour line, transharbour line and 4th corridor (Kharkopar-Nerul/Belapur). No disruption anywhere".

READ | Hefty fines of up to Rs 23,250 for illegal parking in Mumbai from Sunday

Commuters on their way to work remain stuck at 2 km long traffic jams for hours with areas including SV Road, JVLR, Western Express Highway and many other parts hit by waterlogging woes since morning. Weathermen says intermittent rainfall is likely to continue through the day with expected breaks in between. People are also advised to plan their travel accordingly in the view of this incessant showers across the city.

Meanwhile, the Indian Meteorological Department (IMD) has issued a fresh warning, predicting heavy to very heavy rainfall in Konkan, Goa and north Maharashtra regions, including Mumbai, this week. The heavy downpour has been attributed to the cyclonic circulation forming over south Gujarat and Maharashtra.

READ | Monsoon: Death toll rises to 35 across Maharashtra, IMD issues warning of 'heavy' downpour

"Along with the cyclonic circulation, there is plenty of moisture that is getting pumped-in from the Arabian Sea. Collectively, this is causing heavy to very heavy rainfall over the region. This will continue over Konkan and Goa, north Madhya Maharashtra till July 11," Anupam Kashypai, head, weather department, IMD, Pune, said in a statement.
