[TWEET] Maharashtra: Bodies of tigress, 2 cubs found in Chimur Forest

Forest officials would conduct a thorough probe to find out the exact cause of tigers' death. | Photo Credit: ANI

Key Highlights The big cat was found dead by locals in the Chimur Forest area of Chandrapur, Maharashtra. While no external injury marks were found in the initial probe, forest officials are keeping all angles open. Earlier in July, a woman was suspected to have died in a tiger attack in the same area.

Mumbai: In another case of endangered species found dead in a protected area, a tigress and her two cubs were found dead in Chimur Forest area of Maharashtra’s Chandrapur. The corpse of the tigress was found in bushes next to a shallow muddy puddle.

One of her cubs laid dead a few metres away in the Chimur Forest area of Chandrapur and the other cub was also found dead nearby. Initially, there were no external injury marks reported on the big cats. However, forest officials would conduct a thorough probe to find out the exact cause of tigers' death.

The protection of endangered species is a major issue and not just forest officials, but the locals in the forest patches must do their bit to help the helpless animals. Maharashtra is home to a sizable tiger population and the conservation of species is of utmost importance, else the entire ecosystem stands to be in danger.



Maharashtra: Tigress and her two cubs found dead in Chimur Forest area of Chandrapur. pic.twitter.com/x7Lzz53O1u — ANI (@ANI) July 8, 2019

However, there is a steep rise in man-animal conflict in the region. In the sixteenth such incident in Maharashtra, a woman had died of a suspected tiger attack in Chandrapur on July 3. The incident occurred in Tadoba Andhari Tiger Reserve, which is Maharashtra's oldest and largest National Park.

The deceased woman, identified as Shantabai Sonurle, had ventured into the woods to collect firewood and was accompanied by other women from her village.

Many a times, even the animals are at the dying end of the spectrum due to man-made obstructions. On June 19, a leopard was found electrocuted and hanging from a tree near Gurugram’s Sohna village. The animal was suspected to have gotten entangled with the live wire while it was hunting for prey.

In this case, the face of the big cat was severely burnt as it might have hit the electric wire head first while it was trying to pounce on its prey.


