Around 20,000 defence civil employees in Mumbai to go on strike from January 23 to 25

Maharashtra

Mumbai

Ambarnath

Republic Day

Indian National Defence Workers Federation

Bharatiya Pratiraksha Mazdoor Sangh

Opposing privatisation and closure of Defence industry and to get back the pension right, about 40,000 Defence civil employees fromincluding 20,000 inwould go on strike for three days from January 23. Mumbai has an ordnance factory atand a central Defence depot at Kandivali, Naval Dockyard, Military Engineering Service would too remain shut during the strike.There are four lakh defence employees across the country who decided to stop the working just before the. The call for the strike has been jointly called by the All India Defence Federation (AIDF),(INDWF) and(BPMS).Also, Centre of Indian Trade Union has supported the strike.Reacting on the strike, the AIDEF general secretary C Srikumar said that the Defence industry is under a serious threat. "The present government with the sole intention of supporting the private corporate houses has decided to hand over the strategic Defence Production and related activities like research and services to these corporate houses," he alleged. Terming a "historic mistake" offloading more than 275 products being manufactured in the 41 ordinance factories as non-core, Srikumar said that it has affected 25 ordinance factories."We demand the withdrawl of decision taken to declare the products of ordnance factories as non-core, provide sufficient workload and change the costing system of ordnance factories by removing the salary element and other overheads from the cost of these products, enabling Armed forces to continue to procure items from the factories. No closer ofElectronics and Mechanical Engineers (EME) stations workshops and scrap national pension system and restore Defined Pension under Central Civil Service (Pension)," he added.EME Employees Union president, Ashok Kutty, said that the similar strike was conducted in 2014 when then Defence minister had promised to reduce FDI in the defence. "However, the present government is keen on privatisation which is dangerous to the national security. The government plans to shut all EME workshops where Defence equipment are repaired," Kutty said.General Secretary of Centre of Indian Trade Unions ,Tapan Sen, informed that it has extended full support to the strike. "The Defence procurement policy of the government of India is totally oriented towards destroying indigenous manufacturing capacity in the field of Defence production developed during last several decades. This is a grave conspiracy against the national security to make it perpetually dependent on the foreign multinationals," he said.
