Fall of Congress govt in MP like K'taka cannot be ruled out: BJP

BHOPAL: The Madhya Pradesh BJP has asked its legislators to be watchful in view of the political developments in Karnataka. Party leaders said that fall of Kamal Nath government in Madhya Pradesh like Karnataka could not be ruled out any time.The BJP MLA meeting convened on Monday, decided to form a shadow cabinet to counter Congress-led state government on issues which helped the old party retain power in the state. The meeting also discussed plans to counter Congress government on core issues related to the public."The Congress government will fall on its own. Before Lok Sabha elections, when the government assumed power, public thought Congress would fulfil all the promises made to them. But, the Congress failed. This resulted into an insulting defeat of the old party in the Lok Sabha elections. BJP will not topple the Congress government but, the fate of Congress like in Karnataka could not be ruled out", said Leader of Opposition (LoP), Gopal Bhargava on Monday.BJP, who has been raising the issue of a tottering government amid fissures in the old party which surfaced during a recent cabinet meeting, also chalked out a strategy against the Congress government's failures. Senior party leaders and former ministers who will be part of shadow cabinet have been asked to churn out discrepancies in the functioning of the ministers and their departments. They will be the guiding force for other MLAs who will keep tap on lapses committed by Congress ministers, said sources."We will monitor the ministers and working in their departments. Congress government had promised loan waiver , free power supply to poor, justified price of their produce to farmers, house to homeless but the party is making an alibi of paucity of funds. Instead, the party is busy in mass transfers and huge money is being spent on the renovation of ministers", said Bhargava.BJP leaders believed that Congress was grappling with the internal crisis that cropped up after the resignation of party president Rahul Gandhi . Senior leaders in the party are also undecided about the fate and adding to it, developments in Karnataka have turned them apprehensive about the party's future in Madhya Pradesh."BJP MLAs must be watchful of all political activities in the state. Congress is fearful of the party's fate and the saffron workers are hopeful that the old party will collapse on its own", said Bhargava."Congress has earned disgrace during last seven months through mass transfers and poor law and order situation. We must make the public aware of all these issues. BJP has its block level workers as main strength and public support will help party retain power", said BJP state president Rakesh Singh.The party gas decided to bring adjournment motion on prominent issues and to raise public problems to corner the Congress ministers. Special instructions have also been issued to the first time MLAs on raising important matters and how to participate in the debate in the house, said sources.
