UP CM Adityanath sets $1 trillion economy target for state in next three years

FIVE DAYS after Prime Minister Narendra Modi set a target of five trillion dollar economy for the country to be achieved in the next five years, Chief Minister Yogi Adityanath on Monday set the ambitious target of “$1 trillion economy” for Uttar Pradesh.

Adityanath said that the milestone for Uttar Pradesh was significant to achieve the national target as every fifth citizen of the country lives in the state as per population figures.

He was in Ayodhya this Monday to inaugurate the 26th Annual Workship of Agriculture Scientists at Acharya Narendra Dev Agriculture University, where he also spoke about how he thinks this target could be achieved.

Explained Eye on 2022 polls and a lofty goal EVEN AS Chief Minister Yogi Adityanath did not specify a time period to achieve the $1 trillion economy goal, it is obvious that with just two and half years of his government left until the next Assembly polls, the target is 2022. While Adityanath has cited the target citing the $5 trillion economy goal set by the PM for the country in February this year, during the investors' summit in Lucknow, PM Narendra Modi had talked about $1 trillion dollar economy goal for UP. He had said UP and Maharashtra were going to compete to reach the $1 trillion dollar economy goal. To trya nd achieve the target in next the two and half years is quite ambitious.

Adityanath said what the PM said applies to states, district administrations and also to institutions.

“He has said that in the coming years, what can we do to make the economy of India a $5 trillion dollar economy. This pledge of Prime Minister is to bring smiles to the faces of 130 crore people of this country and to turn India into an economic superpower,” said the CM.

Maintaining that if the country remains happy, every citizen would also be happy, Adityanath said, “if one in every five citizens of the country lives in Uttar Pradesh, the state will also have to work in the direction of achieving 1 trillion dollar economy mark. Uttar Pradesh will also make attempts in this direction.”

The Chief Minister said while some people expressed doubt over the target, he told them that state would achieve it as it has the resources, which when used correctly has the capacity to feed the entire world

The CM told the gathering that his government was working towards promoting agriculture export. He said there was a variety of rice known as “Kala Namak”, which is grown mainly in Sidharthanagar and research have found that it has most protein content among all varieties of rice and thus could be ideal for export once promoted properly. He added that under the one district, one product scheme of the state government, farmers in Muzaffarnagar district have come out with 118 varieties of jaggery.

He said the country would “have to be ready to reach more milestones by 2022,” which would mark 75 years of Independence.

The CM also claimed that his government was working on “Naasal sudhar” (genetic improvement in cattle) for increased milk product, which according to him would also help in solving the stray animal problem and at the same time help in increased milk production.

He said in Bundelkhand region, it was seen that cow gives just about 100 gm of milk at a time, because of which farmers abandon them. “If cattle gives 5-7 litres of milk, farmers will not abandon them,” said Adityanath, adding that the government was working with agriculture science centres and vetenary experts in this regard. He also claimed that with nearly four lakh cattle in government-made shelters now, the state was open to the idea of selling compost made from cowdung, to benefit the shelters.

Chief Secretary Anoop Chandra Pandey said that as of last year, the Gross Domestic Product (GDP) of the state was nearly Rs 14.5 lakh crore.
