Cooks on strike across Bihar, mid-day meals cut off to 70,000 schools

As many as 1.25 lakh cooks have called a protest demanding raised wages (Representative Image) | Photo Credit: BCCL

Patna: Children studying at over 70,000 primary and middle schools across Bihar will not be receiving state-sponsored lunch under the Mid-day Meal Scheme (MDM) owing to an indefinite strike by cooks associated with the scheme. As many as 2.18 lakh cooks are currently on an indefinite strike demanding an increase in pay.

At present, a cook in Bihar is paid a meager sum of Rs 1,250 per month. These protestors work part-time contract jobs for the MDM scheme. The cooks' strike began on January 7 with protestors citing examples of Tamil Nadu and Puducherry where MDM cooks are paid Rs 4,000 per month. According to a report by Indian Express, the cooks have also demanded that the payment of wages be dispersed on a 12-month basis as opposed to the current 10 working months wage system.

The protestors, under the banner of Bihar Rajya Madhyan Bhojan Rasoiya Sanyukt Sangharsh Samiti, have been staging demonstrations at several block and district offices across the state. One of the cooks told media personnel that they are getting paid Rs 1,250 per month for six to eight hours of work each day which amounts to a violation of the labour law.

However, the adverse effects of this strike have already begun. According to one RK Singh who is a primary school teacher in Banka district, students' attendance has gone down by 10 to 20 per cent since the strike. Deputy director of the MDM scheme, Jeevendra Jha said that out of the amount paid to cooks each month, Rs 200 is paid by the state government and the remaining Rs 1,000 is paid by the centre.

Times Network - India's Leading Broadcasting Network, uniquely offering English Entertainment, best in class News channels & Bollywood Masala, available at a Value pack (7 channels) of Rs 13/- per month.

Please contact your cable/DTH service provider now and ensure that your TV viewing experience is complete. To know more click here.

Must Read: Climate change: World to miss global greenhouse gas emissions target in 2020, say analysts
