Karnataka crisis: JD(S)-Cong ministers quit, CM likely to reshuffle cabinet to woo dissident MLAs, BJP keeps close watch

Karnataka crisis: JD(S)-Cong ministers quit, CM likely to reshuffle cabinet to woo dissident MLAs, BJP keeps close watch

With the support of the two independents, the BJP has 107 MLAs in the 224-member House, where the half-way mark is 113. If the resignations of the 13 MLAs are accepted, the coalition's tally will be reduced to 103. The Speaker also has a vote.

As the JD(S)-Congress coalition government in Karnataka teetered on the brink of collapse, all the ministers quit Monday to give a free hand to Chief Minister HD Kumaraswamy to reshuffle his Cabinet to include rebel MLAs while two Independent legislators also withdrew their support.

There was no immediate word from the rebel camp on the move to reshuffle the Cabinet in a bid to save the wobbly 13-month-old government, as the action shifted to Goa from Mumbai after 13 dissident MLAs--10 of the Congress and 3 of the JD(S) — submitted their resignations to the Assembly Speaker's office on Saturday triggering a fresh political crisis.

The ruling coalition faces the threat of losing its majority if the resignations of the 13 rebel MLAs are accepted. The JD(S)-Congress coalition's total strength after Nagesh and Shankar withdrew support is 116 (Congress-78, JD(S)-37 and BSP-1) besides the Speaker.

With the support of the two independents, the BJP has 107 MLAs in the 224-member House, where the half-way mark is 113. If the resignations of the 13 MLAs are accepted, the coalition's tally will be reduced to 103. The Speaker also has a vote.

Siddaramaiah said all Congress ministers voluntarily resigned and have given "full freedom" to the party to reshuffle the ministry.

"All ministers from JDS have submitted their resignations just like the 21 ministers from Congress. Cabinet reshuffle will happen soon," the Chief Minister's Office said in a tweet.

Kumaraswamy told reporters he had "no fear" about the happenings and was concentrating on fulfilling his responsibilities. He evaded a direct answer to a question about the resignation of the 13 MLAs and merely said "Let's see".

According to Rajeev Gowda, a state Congress leader from Karnataka, UPA Chairperson and Congress leader Sonia Gandhi said she is "very very confident" that things will be back to normal in a couple of days.

(With inputs from ANI and PTI)
