Mumbai Rains: IMD predicts very heavy rains, issues red alert

A man holds a child high above his head as he wades through a waterlogged street following heavy rains in Mumbai. (AP image)

Days after heavy rains killed over 40 people in Mumbai, monsoon rains have once again thrown life out of gear in India's financial capital. The Indian Meteorological Department has predicted extremely heavy to very heavy rains in Mumbai and south Konkan area on Tuesday. Heavy to very heavy rainfall is also likely to occur in the districts of Raigad, Thane and Palghar. Ratnagiri and Sindhudurg will witness heavy to very heavy rain till Friday.

The Met department has warned fishermen not to venture into the Arabian Sea which will be very rough with high waves and wind speeds touching 40-50 kmph till Friday.

Here are the latest updates on Mumbai rains:

08:20 am: Weather forecast by IMD at 08:00 am - Intermittent rain likely with heavy to very heavy rainfall likely to occur in Mumbai and suburbs

08:15 am: Local trains running on schedule. The Central Railways has informed that train traffic is normal on Tuesday morning. "No water-logging reported, rainfall of 13 mm recorded in Kurla to Mulund section during last one hour. Middle line cleared and safe in South East Ghat section. Now all three lines, Up, Down and Middle are operational," Central Railway CPRO said in a statement.

Mumbai's Monday woes

Heavy rains made reappearance in Mumbai after a hiatus, affecting road and rail traffic and briefly disrupting operations at the city airport.

Office-goers braved torrential downpour in many parts of the metropolis to reach their places of work. The suburbs received around 20 mm rainfall in just three hours starting 8.30 am, an IMD official said.

This caused water-logging on rail tracks at Ghatkopar, Kanjurmarg, Sion and other stations due to which local trains on the Central Line were running slow.

Operations at Mumbai airport were briefly suspended in the morning due to heavy rains, which prompted the airport operator to divert three city-bound flights, a Mumbai International Airport official said. No flights were cancelled.

Runway operations at the Mumbai airport remained suspended for nearly 20 minutes from 9.12 am due to heavy rains, he added.

Waterlogging and traffic jams were reported across the city on Monday as heavy downpour lashed the city. Traffic jams were witnessed at Bandra, Santacruz and Vile Parle, while slow moving traffic was seen in Borivali and Bandra. Traffic was also affected due to waterlogging on SV Road till Juhu SNDT College, Andheri to Goregaon SV Road, Behram Baug in Jogeshwari (West), Malad Crematorium and several other areas

The Mumbai municipal corporation said it regrets the inconvenience caused to Mumbai residents owing to heavy rain.

Apart from Mumbai, other parts of Maharashtra also faced Monsoon fury. Two 12-year-old boys died after falling into a rainwater-filled pit in Titwala area of Thane district on Monday. In another incident in Turbhe in neighbouring Navi Mumbai, heavy rains washed away some shanties, an official said, adding that no casualties were reported.

Advance of Southwest Monsoon (Source: IMD)

Rest of the country

While Monsoon rains continue to ditch the national capital area, heavy rains killed three children in Uttar Pradesh.

The children were killed and their father injured in Uttar Pradesh's Muzaffarnagar district on Monday morning after the roof of their house collapsed during rains, police said.

Rains also occurred in parts of Rajasthan, with Mangliawas in Ajmer recording a maximum of 8 cm rainfall, according to the Meteorological (MeT) department.

Bhinay in Ajmer recorded 7 cm rain, Nimbahera in Chittorgarh received 5 cm rainfall and several other areas recorded below 5 cm rainfall between Sunday and Monday morning.

Chandigarh, the joint capital of Haryana and Punjab, received 29.1 mm of rainfall, bringing respite to the residents from hot and humid weather conditions.

The national capital, however, saw a hot and humid day, with the mercury settling at 36.7 degrees Celsius -- a notch above normal.

The weatherman has predicted partly cloudy day on Tuesday with possibility of light rains towards the afternoon.
