Indian Army asks personnel to be extra careful on WhatsApp conversations, avoid large groups

Army has again warned its personnel against use of social media platforms for official use

Key Highlights Army has asked its personnel against use of social media platforms for official use The directive issued by DGMO asks its personnel to avoid large WhatsApp groups Information shared on social media platforms can be compromised: Army

New Delhi: With the spy games slowly moving into the virtual world, the Indian Army has again warned its personnel against Pakistani spy agencies trying to elicit information using social media platforms, according to Army sources quoted by a news agency. In its latest warning, the Army has asked its personnel and their families to avoid being extra active on WhatsApp - especially in large groups where members are unknown.

The warning has been issued given the fact that enemy agencies have access to advanced monitoring, decryption and data analysis capabilities, as per the Director General of Military Operations (DGMO) instructions.

The directive has warned of strict action against personnel found using personal devices and messaging apps to exchange official information. The Army has clearly stated that no social media platform is safe and every shred of information being shared on the platforms can be decrypted.

Even as per the existing social media policy, the Army personnel are advised against revealing their identities, pictures of equipment, maps, and other material related to the forces. The directive also makes reference to honey-trapping of service personnel.

Earlier in June, the Army had identified an Instragam handle - suspected to be of a Pakistani girl spy trying to target Army officers and special forces' troops. An advisory was immediately issued to be careful and avoid unknown social media contacts.

This year in January, the Army also reportedly carried out random checks on phones, laptops, and desktops of officers and soldiers in sensitive areas. A comprehensive list of "Don'ts" was issued advising its personnel against posting photos of military equipment and cantonments. The list also prohibits its personnel from watching porn online and specifically advises against clicking on online advertisements.

Several cases of honey-trapping through social media platforms in the past have prompted the Army to take such steps. However, despite such instructions, such cases continue to surface. Recently an Army jawan was arrested from Mhow for sharing confidential information through WhatsApp with Pakistani handlers. The jawan was reportedly honey-trapped.

Last year in September, a BSF constable was arrested by Uttar Pradesh Anti-Terrorism Squad (ATS). He was suspected to be honey-trapped by Pakistan's ISI and had reportedly shared classified information regarding police academy, unit operational details, and training centre.




