Dentist is accused of illegally killing more than a thousand jaguars in Brazil

Brazilian authorities have busted a gang of illegal poachers, including a dentist who has reportedly killed more than 1,000 jaguars.

Police arrested seven men in the north-western state of Acre on suspicion of having killed thousands of endangered animals including jaguars, capybara, collared peccary and red brocket deer.

Reports state the longest-serving member of the gang and the most active was Temistocles Barbosa Freire, a dentist who is believed to have illegally killed more than a thousand jaguars since 1987.

According to federal police investigations the dentist would have killed more than 1,000 jaguars since 1987

Images reportedly show Freire carrying a dead jaguar on his back as hunting dogs surround him.

Reports state the Brazilian authorities had hacked the gang's conversations and monitored their movement for at least three months before making the arrests.

Brazilian NGO, Oeco, said police had wiretapped, monitored cell phones and collected photos and videos where the accused had recorded the animals being killed.

It said in just three months of monitoring there were eleven incidents of poaching, during which, eight jaguars, 13 capybaras, 10 hounds and two dead deer were killed by the group.

Brazilian authorities had hacked the gang's conversations and monitored their movement for at least three months before making the arrests

The gang are said to have used the sound of the cuica, a high-pitched Brazilian friction drum, to attract the jaguars.

Following the investigation seven men were arrested and the Federal Court has opened criminal cases of illegal hunting and use of a firearm without a permit against all the men.

Among the other six men arrested was a doctor, Doria de Lucena Junior; a worker in the Judicial Branch, Sinezio Adriano de Oliveira; a farmer, Gilvan Souza Nunes; a prison officer, Gisleno Jose Oliveira de Araujo Sa and an electrician Manoel Alves de Oliveira.

The three other men whose professions were not reported have been named as Sebastiao Junior de Oliveira Costa, Reginaldo Ribeiro da Silva and Gersildo dos Santos Araujo.

Reports state the gang could face prison sentences and fines if found guilty, depending on their exact participation in the crimes.

The Brazilian authorities have arrested seven men in the north-western state of Acre on suspicion of having killed thousands of endangered animals

The jaguar is the largest cat in Latin America and it is listed on the Convention on International Trade in Endangered Species of Wild Fauna and Flora (CITES) Appendix I.

This means that all international trade in jaguars or their body parts is prohibited.

Hunting jaguars is prohibited in Argentina, Brazil, Colombia, French Guiana, Honduras, Nicaragua, Panama, Paraguay, Suriname, the United States, and Venezuela.

The jaguar is listed as 'near threatened' on the International Union for Conservation of Nature's red list.

The case comes after American dentist Walter Palmer killed Cecil the Lion, a male lion which lived in the Hwange National Park in Matabeleland North, Zimbabwe.

The lion was being studied by a research team from the University of Oxford at the time of his death.

Dentist, Walter Palmer, was not charged for killing the lion but received widespread criticism for it

Cecil was wounded with an arrow by Palmer in July 2015 before being tracked and killed with a bow and arrow the following morning.

Palmer had a permit and was not charged with any crimes but he received widespread criticism for killing the lion after the case.

The United States Fish and Wildlife Service added lions in India and West and Central Africa to the endangered species list five months after Cecil was killed, making it more difficult for United States citizens to legally kill lions.

The investigation in Brazil is ongoing.
