‘Sacred Games’ Season 2: August 2019 Netflix Release, What To Expect

Sacred Games is heading back to Netflix in August 2019 for season 2. Here’s what we know about the next season of Sacred Games and when it’ll be streaming on Netflix.

Season 1 of Sacred Games released on Netflix on July 6th, 2018. The police drama from India has gone down a treat with audiences in India and beyond.

In Western countries, you can enjoy the series in either dub or subtitles.

The story of betrayal, glamour, and grit comes from the acclaimed Indian cast and directors behind the series which includes names such as Saif Ali Khan, Nawazuddin Siddiqui and Radhika Apte starring with Anurag Kashyap and Vikramaditya Motwane directing.

Has Season 2 of Sacred Games been renewed?

Official renewal status: Renewed in September 2018

The series gained fantastic reviews plus also has gotten the approval of fans both in India and abroad. So it should be no surprise that a little over a month the series got a season 2 renewal from Netflix. The official Netflix India account was first to break the news before advising fans to stop threatening them with Bunty’s.

Sacred Games represents a push for Netflix to become more relevant in a region (India) with increasing competition for Netflix. Titles like Sacred Games will be key to their success. They’ve made significant strides so far but Sacred Games is the biggest series to come from India so far.

The worst is yet to come. Sacred Games will be back for Season 2. pic.twitter.com/lSBIzQR2b9 — Netflix India (@NetflixIndia) September 21, 2018

Season 2’s production began in November 2018 with filming finishing in February 2019.

What will happen in Sacred Games season 2?

The series will once again follow Saif Ali Khan aka Sartaj Singh who is reeling from the events of episode 8 of season 1. Sartaj raced against time to find out who the third father was and stop the impending doom of Mumbai.

We’re expecting lots of new locations where the show is headed in season 2. In particular, a large portion of this series has been filmed in Nairobi, Kenya, and South Africa too.

You can expect things to ramp up significantly with VFX this season 2 too with Samridhi Bhati saying “Yes the Sacred Games 2 is going to have a fair amount of VFX and we are working on it.”

Vikramaditya Motwane who is the showrunner for season 2 of the show has said the following in a press release:

“We’re extremely excited to finally be able to share with the fans of Sacred Games what they’ve all been waiting for with bated breath – the date of its release on Netflix! This season is bigger, more compelling, and totally unexpected. Be prepared to discover a different side to each character as we take the audience on a tremendous journey, and address questions left unanswered last season.”

Sacred Games Season 2 Cast Members

Back in May 2019, new cast members for the show were announced and confirmations of who is returning too.

Among the new cast members coming in season 2 are Batya Abelman who will be played by Kalki Koechlin and Shahid Khan who will be played by Ranvir Shorey.

When is season 2 of Sacred Games on Netflix?

Let’s start off with the biggest news. The second season of Sacred Games will be releasing on Netflix worldwide on August 15th, 2019. The official Netflix page for the show has yet to be updated with its new release date.

Sacred Games season 2 is coming to Netflix on August 15th, 2019 pic.twitter.com/GB5xmn6Q45 — What's on Netflix (@whatonnetflix) July 9, 2019

We’ve also gotten the full trailer for season 2 which was released on July 9th, 2019.

Here are a few screenshots of what we can expect from season 2 of Sacred Games.

Are you looking forward to another season of Sacred Games? Let us know in the comments.
