Dealing with disasters

The massive earthquake in Southern California last week was horrific in its magnitude, but surprisingly caused no loss of life. That was indeed a telling testimony to the preparedness and disaster management protocols the authorities in the region could initiate in quick time. Unfortunately, the same cannot always be said about India’s response to an emergency. Floods, cloud bursts, earthquakes, even drought catch us flat footed leaving behind a trail of death and disaster. Of course, after an event, we are quick to assess the damage and draw up plans to counter nature’s fury. A blueprint is drawn up but quickly forgotten till the next emergency catches us unawares.

There is a lot we can learn from California as it is expected that in the next 10 years natural disasters will strike across the world, with India being identified as one of the vulnerable regions. However, experts believe that it is possible to save lives and reduce devastation if disaster risk reduction measures are strictly put in place. This is exactly the point underscored in the Tata Institute of Social Sciences’ India's Disaster Report No.2.

Apparently, a few simple and inexpensive measures will do the trick. For a start, laws that are already in place need to be strictly enforced — these could relate to tests buildings need to clear before they are certified habitable or the minimum distance from the coast that must be maintained before allowing concrete constructions. Disaster specialists have also emphasised that the government must come forward to galvanise the collective capacity of all agencies — civil society, voluntary organisations, the media and others.

But, do we give disaster management a priority? A very tiny beginning was made during Cyclone Fani in Odisha where administrative response translated into timely evacuation. This was much appreciated by international agencies, but alas the rehabilitation process is not getting the same priority. Much more work needs to be done for us to come anywhere near sharpening our response to a disaster, be it natural or man-made.
