Dentist arrested after ‘killing 1,000 protected jaguars in sick hunting spree’

The video will auto-play soon 8 Cancel

We have more newsletters

Thank you for subscribing

Something went wrong, please try again later.

Don't miss a thing by getting the Daily Star's biggest headlines straight to your inbox!

The Brazilian authorities have arrested seven men in the north-western state of Acre on suspicion of having killed thousands of endangered animals including jaguars.

The alleged longest-serving gang member was Temistocles Barbosa Freire, a dentist who is believed to have illegally killed more than 1,000 jaguars since 1987, local media reports.

Images appeared to show gang members taking turns to carry a dead jaguar as hunting dogs surround them.

Reports state the Brazilian authorities had hacked the gang’s conversations and monitored their movement for at least three months before making arrests.

(Image: CEN)

All seven men were arrested and the Federal Court has opened criminal cases against them of illegal hunting and use of a firearm without a permit.

Reports state that in the three months cops monitored the gang they killed “eight jaguars, 13 capybaras, 10 collared peccaries and two deer”.

The gang are said to have used the sound of the cuica, a high-pitched Brazilian friction drum, to attract the jaguars.

If found guilty, the gang could face prison sentences and fines depending on their level of participation in the crimes, Brazilian media reports.

The jaguar is listed as “Near Threatened” on the International Union for Conservation of Nature’s Red List.

(Image: CEN) (Image: CEN) (Image: CEN)

This case comes after US dentist Walter Palmer killed Cecil the Lion, a male lion which lived n the Hwange National Park in Matabeleland North, Zimbabwe.

Cecil was wounded with an arrow by Palmer in July 2015 before being tracked and killed with a bow and arrow the following morning.

Palmer had a hunting permit and was not charged with any crimes but he received widespread criticism for killing the lion after the case received international media attention.

The US Fish and Wildlife Service added lions in India and West and Central Africa to the endangered species list five months after Cecil was killed, making it more difficult for United States citizens to legally kill lions.

The investigation in Brazil is ongoing.
