India Post News Paper

Indian descent man sentenced for sexually abusing boy on plane NEW YORK: A man of Indian descent has been sentenced to 15 months in prison after being found guilty of sexually abusing a 16-year-old boy, who took pictures of the...

Gujarati family that froze to death on Canada-US border identified Toronto, Jan 28 (IANS) The four members of a Gujarati family, who froze to death in minus 35 degrees temperatures on January 19 near the Canadian town of Emerson while...

India has again emerged as world’s fastest-growing economy: President Kovind NEW DELHI: President Ram Nath Kovind on Monday said that India has once again established itself as the world’s fastest-growing economy. “Due to consistent endeavours, India has again emerged as...

Economic Survey projects 8-8.5 GDP growth for FY 2022-23 NEW DELHI: India’s economic growth is expected to remain in the range of 8 to 8.5 per cent in 2022-23 as against a projected growth of 9.2 per cent in...

Punjab polls 2022: At 94, Parkash Singh Badal to become oldest candidate to contest elections NEW DELHI: Five-time former Punjab Chief Minister and senior Shiromani Akali Dal (SAD) leader Parkash Singh Badal will become the oldest candidate to contest any type of election in the...

Four Chinese military aircraft enter Taiwan’s air defence identification zone TAIPEI: Four Chinese military aircraft entered Taiwan’s air defence identification zone (ADIZ) on January 30, marking the 23rd intrusion this month, reported Taiwan News. According to the Ministry of National...

US to shut down Afghan embassy, strip diplomats of immunity KABUL: Afghan diplomats in the US have been informed that their embassy in Washington will be closed down and will also be stripped of their diplomatic immunity. As per the...

Tesla now selling microphone for in-car karaoke WASHINGTON: American electric vehicle and clean energy company Tesla will now be selling a microphone for in-car karaoke. According to TechCrunch, the TeslaMic is only available in China for the...

iOS 15.4 beta supports 120Hz refresh rate in all apps WASHINGTON: Apple is finally adding 120Hz ProMotion support for all apps through its upcoming iOS 15.4 software. As per GSM Arena, the iOS 15.4 that is currently in beta has...

‘Absolutely magnificent’: Sachin lauds Nadal on winning record 21st Grand Slam NEW DELHI: Former Indian cricketer Sachin Tendulkar on Sunday congratulated tennis star Rafael Nadal after the Spaniard won the men’s record-breaking 21st Grand Slam. Under the lights on Rod Laver...

Rohit has been on top of his game in Tests, he’s successful leader: Ponting DUBAI: Former Australia skipper Ricky Ponting has shown support for Rohit Sharma leading India in Tests looking at his impeccable record as a leader. Earlier this month, Kohli stood down...

Congratulatory messages pour in for ‘BB 15’ winner Tejasswi Prakash MUMBAI: As actor Tejasswi Prakash lifted the ‘Bigg Boss’ Season 15 trophy, several friends and celebrities shared congratulatory messages on social media. Kishwer Merchant took to her Instagram Story and...

‘BB 15’ finale: Shehnaaz Gill remembers Sidharth Shukla in special tribute, has teary reunion with Salman Khan NEW DELHI: Singer-actor Shehnaaz Gill graced the sets of ‘Bigg Boss 15’ on Sunday for the show’s season finale, and dedicated a special tribute for the late Sidharth Shukla. As...

Miss Universe 2021 Harnaaz Sandhu mourns demise of Miss USA 2019 Cheslie Kryst NEW DELHI: Miss Universe 2021 Harnaaz Sandhu is heartbroken after hearing about the sudden demise of Miss USA 2019 Cheslie Kryst. The 30-year-old beauty queen, lawyer, fashion blogger and Extra...

Kareena, Malaika, Karisma celebrate Amrita Arora’s birthday MUMBAI: Actor Amrita Arora’s girl gang, including sister Malaika, BFF Kareena Kapoor and Karisma Kapoor, threw a midnight bash for her 44th birthday. Taking to her Instagram handle, Kareena shared...

Made in India COVID-19 vaccines playing important role in making world free from pandemic: President Kovind NEW DELHI: President Ram Nath Kovind on Monday said that ‘Made in India’ COVID-19 vaccines are playing an important role in making the world free from the pandemic. “COVID-19 vaccines...

Pralhad Joshi calls Congress ‘All India Confused Party’ DEHRADUN: Union Minister and Bharatiya Janata Party’s Uttarakhand election in-charge Pralhad Joshi said that Congress is ‘All India Confused Party’ as it failed to develop the state inspite of being...

PM Modi to address 30th NCW Foundation Day programme today NEW DELHI: Prime Minister Narendra Modi will address the 30th National Commission for Women (NCW) Foundation Day programme on Monday, at 4:30 pm via video conferencing. In a tweet today,...

India’s cumulative COVID-19 vaccination coverage exceeds 166.03 crore NEW DELHI: With the administration of more than 28 lakh vaccine doses in the last 24 hours, India’s COVID-19 vaccination coverage has exceeded 166.03 crores, informed the Ministry of Health...
