'Sub-standard cheap acts' says TMC, accuses BJP for fake membership card bearing Mamata Banerjee's name

Secretary general of All India Trinamool Congress Partha Chatterjee on Tuesday said that the party will take action against the culprits after a picture of Mamata Banerjee on a BJP membership card was doing the rounds on social media sites — Facebook and Whatsapp.

He showed a printout of the fake membership card which carries a photo of Mamata Banerjee on its left side. It mentions the 'member's' name as Mamata Banerjee and the state as West Bengal. The card also has Bharatiya Janata Party inscribed on it in a large font with a logo.

Hitting out at the BJP for the fake membership card, Chatterjee said the saffron party had resorted to "sub-standard cheap acts".

Partha Chatterjee said, "Unnamed or fake profiles on social media are spreading these images in order to confuse the common people and TMC workers".

"We are in the process of making a complaint with the Kolkata Police so that the culprits are identified and booked under relevant sections of the cyberlaw," he further added.

Prime Minister Narendra Modi launched BJP's Membership Drive in Varanasi Uttar Pradesh on July 6. Through this drive the party aims at increasing its membership by 20 percent. The drive was launched to mark the birth anniversary of BJP's founder Syama Prasad Mukherjee.

Vice president of BJP Shivraj Singh Chouhan said that the party has set a target of adding minimum 20 percent more workers in its current strength through this drive, which will conclude on August 11.

Anyone can become a member by giving a missed call on a mobile number or by filing a form, Chouhan said in a statement.

Defense Minister Rajnath Singh is conducting the BJP's membership drive programme in Jaipur, BJP chief and Home Minister Amit Shah in Hyderabad and Union Road Minister Nitin Gadkari in Nagpur.

The incident of Mamata Banerjee's picture appearing on the BJP membership card seems to be a dig at Mamata Banerjee's Party after many TMC party members joined the BJP.

After the Lok Sabha elections, many TMC party members joined the BJP after the party's poor performance in the Lok Sabha elections.

Earlier in June, Trinamool Congress MLA Sunil Singh along with 12 TMC councillors joined BJP in presence of BJP leaders Kailash Vijayvargiya and Mukul Roy.

Tensions between BJP and TMC party members escalated after the Lok Sabha polls with incidents of violence being reported from various parts of West Bengal.

In the month of June, clashes broke out between the workers of the BJP and the TMC allegedly over chanting of "Jai Shri Ram" at Gurap village in West Bengal's Hooghly district and one person was critically injured after being hit by a bullet fired accidentally from a police revolver.

In Bhatpara, two people were killed and 11 others injured Thursday after clashes broke out between two groups suspected to be affiliated to the TMC and the BJP in Bhatpara area of West Bengal's North 24 Parganas district on June 20.

The violence forced the West Bengal government to impose section 144 in Bhatpara and Jagatdal areas of North 24 Parganas district.

(With inputs from PTI)
