Karnataka crisis: BJP to stage dharna today, demanding CM HD Kumaraswamy’s resignation

“I have held discussions with our legislators and we have decided to hold a protest in front of the Gandhi statue at 11 AM, demanding the resignation of Chief Minister Kumaraswamy who has lost majority,” party state unit Chief B S Yeddyurappa told reporters here.

The BJP in Karnataka demonstrated outside the Vidhana Soudha on Wednesday to demand that Chief Minister H D Kumaraswamy step down from office, claiming his government has lost majority after 14 MLAs of the ruling Congress-JD(S) alliance submitted their resignations. A delegation of saffron party leaders, led by state unit chief B S Yeddyurappa also met Governor Vajubhai Vala at Raj Bhavan, submitted a memorandum to him on the matter and requested him to advice the Speaker to act immediately on the resignations.

“We have made this request.. as Kumaraswamy has lost the majority, he has to resign immediately. The Speaker, without any delay, has to accept the resignations,” Yeddyurappa said. Speaking to reporters after emerging from the Raj Bhavan, he said the Governor informed them he would take necessary action after examining everything. “We are satisfied,”he said. To a question on whether BJP asked for a floor test, he said they had not done so and there was no question of it at all as the government had already lost majority.

“As the government has already lost its majority, if the Speaker accepts the resignations without delay, even the assembly session (from July 12) also wont happen,” he added. Noting that there are chances of more MLAs resigning, he said Kumaraswamy should at least now understand the reality and resign as Chief Minister.

Earlier in the day, several state BJP leaders, including former deputy Chief Minister K S Eshwarappa took part in the protest led by state president B S Yeddyurappa in front of the Mahatma Gandhi statue at the Vidhana Soudha. As Congress leader and state minister D K Shivakumar stood vigil outside a hotel in Mumbai to meet the rebels MLAs, BJP protesters here raised slogans like “Down, down to the government that has lost majority… down, down to CM who wants to stick on to the chair”.

Yeddyurappa also alleged that the political crisis in the state was created by Congress and JD(S) themselves. The situation now was such that they had lost majority and had no moral right to continue in office, he said.

Also read: Surat rally violence: Congress councilor among 40 arrested, booked for rioting

Denying charges that BJP had indulged in horse trading,he pointed out that Congress and JD(S) MLAs had in the last few months openly expressed unhappiness over the government and sought to know how the saffron party was responsible for it. A delegation of BJP leaders Wednesday also met Speaker Ramesh Kumar and apprised him about the political situation and requested him to accept the resignations of the MLAs.

Kumar later told reporters they requested him to take a decision on the resignations at the earliest, to which he replied he would do so in accordance with the law. Former chief minister Yeddyurappa had been holding a series of meetings with party leaders for the last couple of days on the ongoing political developments and BJP’s plan of action.

During the protest, he demanded that Kumaraswamy resign immediately and make way for the BJP to form the government. The BJP’s protest came a day after Congress leaders, including AICC general secretary K C Venugopal and Congress Legislature Party leader Siddaramaiah staged a ‘dharna’ in front of the Gandhi statue, accusing the party of trying to destabilize the government by undemocratic means, using money and political power.

Earlier in the day, Yeddyurappa told reporters he was unable to understand why the Speaker was delaying the process of accepting the resignations. “If the resignation is not in format, MLAs will come and give it in correct format. That’s another matter,” he said. Noting that Kumar was unanimously elected speaker and the BJP trusted him, Yeddyurappa said he should hear legal experts and take immediate action in accordance with law.

The beleaguered JD(S)-Congress coalition government on Tuesday got a breather with the Speaker holding that the resignations of nine out of 14 rebel MLAs are not in order. Kumar said only five were in the prescribed format and asked them to appear before him on July 12 and 15.
