I have come to exchange my heart with my friends: Karnataka minister DK Shivakumar reaches Mumbai, barred

DK Shivakumar outside Renaissance Mumbai Convention Centre Hotel | Photo Credit: ANI

Key Highlights Karnataka minister DK Shivakumar reaches Mumbai hotel where rebel MLAs are staying JD(S) supporters shout 'go back' slogans On tuesday, MLAs asked police to not allow Shivakumar to enter the hotel premises citing 'threat to their lives'

Mumbai: Karnataka minister DK Shivakumar who reached Mumbai on Wednesday was not allowed to enter the Renaissance Mumbai Convention Centre Hotel, where rebel Congress lawmakers have been staying for the past three days. Shivakumar blamed the BJP for barring his entry into the hotel and questioned why he was not allowed to meet his 'brothers'.

"I have come all the way to meet my friends... I wanted to meet them. They have been locked here. I have a room here and they are not allowing me to go inside the room. The police officers are saying that the hotel is not allowing me for security reasons," Shivakumar told reporters outside the hotel.

"I don't have illegal weapons. I have a heart. I have come to exchange my heart with my friends..." he further said. Responding to a question on whether the BJP was behind barring his entry, Shivakumar said, "Yes, of course."

The Karnataka minister was welcomed by slogans of 'go back' as supporters of the JD(S) rallied outside the hotel and protested against his visit. "Go back, Go back," shouted the supporters of JD(S) leader Narayan Gowda outside Renaissance hotel as Shivakumar reached the hotel and attempted to make his way through the security arrangements.

12 Karnataka MLAs- seven of Congress, two independents and three of Janata Dal (Secular) are in Mumbai since Saturday, when they tendered their resignations. According to a PTI report, the MLAs wrote to police late Tuesday night that their life is under threat and that Shivakumar should be prevented from entering the hotel.

Shivakumar's outreach is being viewed as a last-ditch attempt to reach out to the Congress MLAs who have withdrawn their support to the Congress-JD(S) government in Karnataka pushing the state in a political crisis. Assembly Speaker KR Ramesh Kumar has sought six days to make a decision on the resignations of the MLAs. On Tuesday, he had said that eight of the 13 resignations were not in order.

While Congress and JD(S) have blamed the BJP for the turmoil, BJP's top brass including Defence Minister Rajnath Singh, National General Secretary Ram Madhav have denied playing any role in the crisis. If accepted, the resignations will bring down the strength of the House boosting the BJP's chances of forming a government in the state. With 105 MLAs and support from two independents, BJP has a strength of 107 and has already claimed that they can form a government in the state.
