Rahul Gandhi visits Amethi, blames local leaders for Lok Sabha rout; says will not abandon constituency

Congress president Rahul Gandhi listens to a party worker during his visit to Amethi | Photo Credit: PTI

Key Highlights Union minister Smriti Irani had trounced Rahul Gandhi in Amethi Lok Sabha seat by over 52,000 votes Prior to his defeat in May, Rahul Gandhi had been representing Amethi since 1999 Rahul Gandhi said that local leaders did not maintain contact with the voters

Amethi: More than a month after facing shocking defeat in Amethi Lok Sabha seat, Congress leader Rahul Gandhi on Wednesday visited his previous constituency in Uttar Pradesh. However, the leader blamed local leaders for the rout in polls but assured that he would not leave the constituency.

Union minister Smriti Irani had trounced Rahul Gandhi in his bastion by more than 52,000 votes in the Lok Sabha elections 2019. Prior to his defeat in May, Gandhi had been representing Amethi since 1999.

On his first visit to Amethi after the rout, the Congress leader met party functionaries. While no official statement was made regarding what transpired at the meeting, former state Youth Congress chief Nadeem Ashraf Jayasi mentioned Gandhi as saying: “I will not leave Amethi. It is my home and family.”

The former Congress chief also reportedly told party workers that there would be no obstacle in the way of Amethi’s development.

“I am the MP from Wayanad but my ties with Amethi are three decades old. I will fight for Amethi in Delhi," Gandhi purportedly said during the meeting.

District Congress committee member Narendra Mishra said that Gandhi hailed party workers for their hard work during the campaign but added that local leaders did not maintain contact with the voters, leading to his defeat.

Those who attended the meeting said a number of workers mentioned that the campaign of Congress lacked guidance, making the party’s standing weak in the entire district.

They also claimed that some of the party workers were working hand in glove with the BJP in the constituency.

The party functionaries also unanimously urged Gandhi to withdraw his resignation from the party chief’s post. Notably, Rahul Gandhi tendered his resignation while assuming responsibility for Congress’ debacle in the Lok Sabha elections.

Chandrakant Dubey, Rahul Gandhi's representative in Amethi, and Congress district president Yogendra Mishra had also resigned.

Rahul Gandhi’s meeting with party workers went on for around 50 minutes.

The meeting was also attended by booth presidents from five Assembly segments -- Amethi, Gauriganj, Salon, Jagdishpur and Tiloi.

(Pic courtesy: IANS)

After his meeting, Gandhi visited two villages in Chhatoh block. He returned to Delhi afterwards.

Prior to Rahul Gandhi’s visit, a poster surfaced outside the Congress’ office seeking justice for the man who died after allegedly being denied treatment by a Sanjay Gandhi Memorial Trust-run hospital.

In May, BJP leader Smriti Irani had shared a video on micro-blogging website Twitter showing a man alleging that the hospital denied treatment to his uncle because the family had an Ayushman Bharat card. The allegation was rejected by the hospital.
