Cops arrest Indian having ties with Babbar Khalsa International in Malaysia

Taranbir Singh was arrested by the Malaysian Police on Wednesday. | Photo Credit: ANI

Key Highlights Kulwinderjit Singh, a member of the BKI terror group, is Taranbir’s uncle Khanpuriya, the alias Kulwinderjit uses, has several cases registered against his name BKI is the very same organisation that is responsible for the Kanishka bombings

Kuala Lumpur: The Malaysian Police on Wednesday arrested a man of Indian origin for illegally entering the country. He has been charged under the Immigration Act. Identified as 24-year-old Taranbir Singh, the Indian national originally hails from Amritsar in Punjab.

Shockingly, Taranbir revealed during investigation that he is related to a member of the Babbar Khalsa International (BKI), a Sikh militant organisation that goes by the objective of ‘Khalistan’, an independent Sikh country.

Kulwinderjit Singh, a member of the BKI terror group, is Taranbir’s uncle who currently resides in Cambodia. However, he claimed that he does not keep in touch with his uncle, news agency ANI reported.

Taranbir was once earlier arrested for being the facilitator for senior members of the Babbar Khalsa International who had entered the Malaysian soil in November 2018 and again June 2019.

Khanpuriya, the alias Kulwinderjit uses, has several cases registered against his name. He has been accused of allegedly having a hand in bomb blasts that rocked New Delhi in 1995 and the twin blasts in Rajasthan in 1995 and then in 1996.

The Delhi Police had in 2016 stated that Khanpuriya and his aide Balwinder Singh had plotted terror attacks in Delhi. Shockingly, a special court acquitted Kulwinderjit after failing to find any evidence to validate all claims and accusations against him.

It is important to note here that BKI is the very same organisation that is responsible for the Kanishka bombings – Air India Flight 182, one of the deadliest aviation terror acts. The Babbar Khalsa International was also responsible for the 1985 Narita International Airport bombing. They have carried several other terror attacks across the world.

Punjab Chief Minister Captain Amarinder Singh had accused BKI terrorists of making Canada their safe haven. The Punjab CM had also shared classified intel along with the names of their members with the Canadian Prime Minister Justin Trudeau during his visit to India in February 2018.

Ex-Canadian Prime Minister Stephen Harper had long ago claimed that he always stood against Khalistani leaders during his tenure. He had also claimed that he had shunned all ties with the terrorist elements who wanted to divide India working out of Canadian territory.

Meanwhile, the Indian government on Wednesday announced ‘Sikhs For Justice’ (SFJ) as an unlawful association. The Union Cabinet decided to classify the SFJ as an ‘unlawful association’ over the secessionist activities carried out by the SFJ. The SFJ allegedly wanted to make use of the Kartarpur Corridor with Pakistan to propagate their ideologies.
