‘Aisi dhamkiyaan hum sunte rehte hain’: India on al-Qaeda chief’s call for dealing ‘unrelenting blows’ to Army

Ministry of External Affairs spokesperson Raveesh Kumar | Photo Credit: ANI

Key Highlights Al-Qaeda chief Ayman al-Zawahari this week issued a video on Kashmir Zawahiri gave a call for terrorists to deal "unrelenting blows" to India India today said such threats were common

New Delhi: Earlier this week, al-Qaeda had released its first video on Kashmir and issued a warning to the Indian Army and the government. Al-Qaeda chief Ayman al-Zawahari said terrorists should deal "unrelenting blows" to ensure the Indian economy "bleeds" and the country suffers.

Reacting to the video, India on Thursday said it was not the first time such a threat had been issued and added that its security forces are fully equipped to deal with such threats.

Addressing the press here, Ministry of External Affairs spokesperson Raveesh Kumar said: “Aisi dhamkiyaan jo hai na hum sunte rehte hain, mujhe nahi lagta inko seriously lena chahiye. Our security forces are well equipped and capable of maintaining our territorial integrity and sovereignty.”

In the video, Zawahari could be heard saying, "I am of the view that the Mujahideen (armed terrorists) in Kashmir - at this stage at least - should focus with single mind on inflicting unrelenting blows on the Indian Army and the government so as to bleed the Indian economy and make India suffer sustained losses in manpower and equipment."

In the video that surfaced on al-Qaeda’s 'As-Sahab' channel, Zawahiri asks terrorists in Arabic "to establish stronger channels of communication with their Muslim brethren all over the world".

Indian security forces, who have verified the video to be of Zawahiri, who became al-Qaeda chief after Osama bin Laden was killed in a US raid in Pakistan, said it was aimed at bringing the disgruntled terrorists together in the Kashmir Valley.

In the video, a picture of terrorist Zakir Musa is flashed as Zawahiri spoke on Kashmir. Musa, who had set up the Indian arm of al-Qaeda called ‘Ansar Ghazwat-ul-Hind’, was eliminated by the Indian security forces in May this year.

In the video, the al-Qaeda chief cautioned terrorists against falling into Pakistan’s trap, stating Islamabad was US’s puppet.

"All the Pakistani Army and government are interested in exploiting the Mujahideen for specific political objectives, only to dump or persecute them later," Zawahiri said. Pakistan's "conflict with India is essentially a secular rivalry over borders managed by the American intelligence", he alleged.

Zawahiri linked the "fight in Kashmir" to the global Muslim community's "jihad against a vast array of forces", saying the two were linked.

He also went on to refer Pakistani intelligence agencies as America's primary tool in Pakistan.

Zawahiri carries a reward of USD 25 million on its head, announced by the United States.
