Met sounds alert for heavy rain in Bihar

PATNA/MUZAFFARPUR: The India Meteorological Department (IMD) on Thursday issued warning for heavy to very heavy rainfall in the state with extremely heavy rain forecast for north Bihar districts along the Himalayan foothills in the next 48 hours.“Widespread rainfall is very likely over Bihar and adjoining areas of northeast Uttar Pradesh from July 11 to 13. Besides, isolated extremely heavy falls (more than 20.4cm) is also expected over north Bihar during next 48 hours and northeast Uttar Pradesh during next 24 hours,” the IMD bulletin said.Even as the Patna meteorological centre warned of extremely heavy spells of rain in several north Bihar districts on Friday, the swollen Bagmati overflowed a coffer dam at the centre of both embankments in Muzaffarpur’s Aurai block inundating over a dozen villages on Thursday. A cofferdam is a watertight enclosure pumped dry to permit construction work.A 120m portion of the cofferdam was partially damaged due to the overtopping as the water level crossed the 1.6m mark. “The water level went up all of sudden due to rain in catchment areas falling in Nepal leading to the overtopping, which partially damaged the dam across a 120m stretch. We are trying to fix it as soon as possible but continuous rainfall is hampering work,” said Md Shabbir, water resources department executive engineer, Bagmati division.He however denied a breach. “This is not a breach. The cofferdam was erected to align the new course of Bagmati with its old course. This cofferdam has been erected as 60% of the river water will be sent to channel and 40% to the old course. So, we have put the height of the cofferdam below the actual height of both flanks of the embankment,” Shabbir added.However, the villagers here are nervous. Sanjay Kumar of Chainpur village said, “We remain vigilant during night hours as threat of the rising water level in Bagmati is looming large.”In line with the extremely heavy rain forecast by the IMD as well as the private agency Skymet, all major rivers of north Bihar are showing a rising trend due to incessant rainfall in Nepal and the catchment areas of these rivers for the past five days. Gandak poses a flood threat to Muzaffarpur, West Champaran and East Champaran, due to discharge of water from Valmikinagar barrage.It further stated that intensity of rain will also increase along the foothills of Nepal and as most of the rivers flow via Nepal to Bihar, the heavy downpour may aggravate the flood-like situation. Rivers like Kosi, Karcha and Bagmati may swell in the wake of heavy rains.The weather agencies attributed the showers to northward shifting of monsoon trough line. The trough line is an elongated low-pressure area which stretches from west to east and monsoon rainfall normally hinges along it.The Skymet’s bulletin, too, has forecast heavy to extremely heavy spells of rain in the next 24 to 48 hours along the foothills of Himalayas in Bihar in places such as West Champaran, Araria, Supaul, Sitamarhi, Madhubani, Bhagalpur, Khagaria, Purnea and Madhepura In Muzaffarpur district, the water resources department has set up a control room along the Bagmati river embankment in Aurai and has deputed junior engineers, assistant engineers, supervisors and watchmen to keep a tab on the rising water level, monitoring of embankment and ensuring availability of sand bags, stones and other work forces to meet any eventuality.
