SPPU gears up for student elections

Colleges will elect students, who will then vote for university representatives



Several universities in the state have received a nod to hold student elections with an idea of introducing statecraft to the youngsters, and now the Savitribai Phule Pune University (SPPU) is gearing up for this first-of-a-kind event. With the elections scheduled to be held soon, sessions and workshops for principals and varsity officials were held on Thursday, with emphasis on easing the tense atmosphere among students.



The SPPU has about 950 colleges under its umbrella in the three districts of Pune, Nashik and Ahmednagar. Four representatives will be elected from each college, therefore approximately 3,800 students will then vote for university representatives. Prabhakar Desai, director of the board of students’ welfare, said, “Elections will take place in each college for representatives. Elected members will then vote for university representatives. Also, there has been a ban on taking backing from any students union and use of any logo.”



All the colleges affiliated with SPPU will have college elections on their campuses for the posts of president, secretary, lady representative, and reservation representative. Rajendra Zunjarrao, principal of Modern College of Arts, Science and Commerce said, “Before this, the election process would lead to a tense atmosphere and unnecessary fights between students. With voting and results for all the five representatives taking place at the same time, this will eliminate the stress on students.”



While efforts are being made to reduce the tension among students during the election, they feel that it is just another selection process and not a fair ballot process.



Talking to Mirror, Satish Gore, a student representative of Youth Congress, said, “Student election is nothing but a replica of mainstream elections. As this election does not have any backing of ideals or any political ideology; it will be just another selection process and not an election.”



Another such student, Anil Thombare, a representative of the Akhil Bharatiya Vidyarthi Parishad (ABVP), said, “We have started a registration drive and will soon be starting college units of ABVP. Only students who are part of some union know about the upcoming election while others are completely unaware.”


