Congress party gets strength by truth, will fight BJP with love: Rahul Gandhi

Rahul Gandhi

Key Highlights Rahul Gandhi slammed BJP for using money and power to bring down state governments Was granted bail by the court in a criminal defamation suit Says will not budge from the path of truth

New Delhi: Accusing the BJP of using money and power to bring down the Congress-JD(S) coalition government in Karnataka, Rahul Gandhi said that the party is fighting for the truth adding that it gets strength from it.

Rahul was in Ahmedabad after appearing in a court in connection with a criminal defamation suit filed against him during which he gave this statement. He was granted bail by the court.

"BJP brings down the state government by using money and threats wherever it can. You saw it in Goa, in North-East. They are trying to do it in Karnataka. This is their method. They have money, power. So, they use it. That is the reality," ANI quoted Rahul as saying.

Speaking on the criminal defamation case filed against him, he said: "More I am attacked, more I will fight with love...but I will not budge from the path of truth."

Calling it a futile attempt to subdue and threaten him, Rahul said that he will keep fighting. He further added that this fight is about the constitution, the future of the country, corruption, and injustice.

Meanwhile, resort politics returned again in Karnataka with the ruling Congress-JD(S) coalition and opposition BJP herding their MLAs in luxury hotels to keep their flock from falling apart.

While the JD(S) MLAs are staying in a resort near Nandi Hill located on the city outskirts, alliance partner Congress has opted for a star hotel here.

The BJP MLAs are staying in a resort near Yelahanka and a high-end hotel.

Congress-JD(S) combine is fighting hard to save its 13-month old government after 16 of its MLAs resigned from the assembly. Karnataka president BS Yeddyurappa is hoping that HD Kumaraswamy will fail to prove majority in the state assembly.

The rebel MLAs have been staying in a Mumbai hotel since their resignations last Saturday.

Chief Minister H D Kumaraswamy has announced that he would seek a trust vote. He also expressed confidence in winning it.

The ruling coalition's combined strength is 116 (Congress-78, JD(S)-37 and BSP-1), including the Speaker. With the support of the two independents, who resigned from the ministry, the BJP has 107 MLAs in the 224-member House.

If the Speaker KR Ramesh Kumar accepts the resignations of the 16 rebel MLAs then the coalition's tally will be reduced to 100.

The Speaker on Friday told the Supreme Court that allegations made by 10 rebel MLAs of the Congress-JD(S) coalition saying that he was unavailable on the day of their resignation is "fallacious".

He further said that none of the MLAs submitted the resignation in person or by hand.
