20 years of Kargil conflict: Army chief General Bipin Rawat says India will punish Pakistan against any misadventure, turns down reports of Chinese intrusion in Demchok

Marking the 20th year of the Kargil conflict, General Bipin Rawat said the Indian army is enough compatible to fight against the terrorists with utmost technology and strong determination. He, however, warned Pakistan if it attacks the Indian territory, said that any misadventure will be repelled with a punitive response.

Indian Army chief General Bipin Rawat on Saturday warned Pakistan to be ready for a punitive response if any misadventure will have happened. Addressing a seminar to mark the 20 years of Kargil conflict, the army chief said that the Indian army is enough strong to defend the territory. While blaming Pakistan, Bipin said that Pakistan army time and again resorts to misadventure either through flawed proxy wars and state-sponsored terror or intrusions.

Bipin Rawat said that the Indian army is going through a transformation in several fields including Space, Cyber and Special Forces divisions. While celebrating the victory of Kargil conflict, the army chief said that despite several odds including operations conducted on arduous terrain and diplomatic necessities, Indian army achieved in resounding victory in the war. In Kargil conflict, Indian army captured the peak of Tiger Hill where the Pakistan intruders had sneaked in. The bravery of the army helped to recapture the peak despite heavy odds of intelligence failed.

He also said that cross border strikes after Uri attack in 2016 and Balakot air strikes after the Pulwama attack has also demonstrated India’s political will to respond against the terror.

Army Chief: Pakistan army time and again resorts to misadventure either through flawed proxy wars and state sponsored terror or intrusions. Indian Army stands resolute to defend our territory.Let there be no doubt that any misadventure will be repelled with a punitive response https://t.co/WHPcNls3vV — ANI (@ANI) July 13, 2019

The army chief has said the future wars will be more violent and unpredictable as technology has become a key driver of future wars. Cyber and space domain is being increasingly using the used in the weapon machinery which boosts the war requirement substances.

Army Chief General Bipin Rawat: Future conflicts will be more violent and unpredictable where importance of human factor shall remain undiminished. Our soldiers are and will remain our primary assets. pic.twitter.com/gCrcn6L3rl — ANI (@ANI) July 13, 2019

On the eastern front, Rawat said Chinese troops came and patrol their perceived line of actual control which forces try & prevent them. He, however, said that the situation is normal at the Ladakh’s Demchok.

Army Chief General Bipin Rawat: Battlefield will be severely contested and seamlessly connected. In future even conventional conflicts are likely to have a large asymmetric component leading to now what is being termed 'hybrid war'. Technology has become key driver of future wars https://t.co/JbJ5QmtfX1 — ANI (@ANI) July 13, 2019

For all the latest National News, download NewsX App
