Army chief Bipin Rawat sends out stern warning to Pakistan, says any act of terror will not go unpunished

Army chief Bipin Rawat | Photo Credit: ANI

Key Highlights Addressing an event to mark the 20th year of Kargil war, the Army chief said that India will retaliate with a “very punitive response” if Pakistan resorts to misadventure repeatedly. General Rawat also said that Indian armed forces stand resolute and ready to defend the territorial integrity of the country. The Army chief further accused Pakistan of resorting to misadventure, either through flawed proxy wars or state-sponsored terror.

New Delhi: Sending out a stern warning to Pakistan, Army chief General Bipin Rawat has said that any act of terror will not go unpunished, adding, surgical strikes carried out by India after Uri and Pulwama terror attacks demonstrate its stand against terrorism.

Addressing an event to mark the 20th year of Kargil war, the Army chief said that India will retaliate with a “very punitive response” if Pakistan resorts to misadventure repeatedly.

"We are working in a coordinated manner for a cogent and synchronized national response against sub-conventional and asymmetric threats by any adversary. Surgical strikes post-Uri and Balakot have amply demonstrated our political and military resolve against terror. Any act of terror will not go unpunished," he said speaking at an event to mark the completion of 20 years of the Kargil war,” he was quoted as saying by news agency ANI.

The Army chief further accused Pakistan of resorting to misadventure, either through flawed proxy wars or state-sponsored terror.

"Historically burdened by its own inadequacies, internal security and governance issues, Pakistan army time and again resorts to misadventure, either through flawed proxy wars and state-sponsored terror or intrusions in our country," he added.

RELATED NEWS Not sure if Pakistan has shut down terror camps: Indian Army chief Bipin Rawat

General Rawat also said that Indian armed forces stand resolute and ready to defend the territorial integrity of the country.

“Let there be no doubt that any misadventure will be repelled with a very punitive response," he added. Talking about the changing nature of wars, the Army chief said that non-state actors have gained prominence in some countries. "The rise of non-state actors and readiness to use terror and other irregular methods of fighting has become the new norm," he said.

India conducted surgical strikes against Pakistan after Uri and Pulwama terror attacks in 2017 and 2019 respectively. Following Uri attack in which 17 Army personnel were killed, India carried out surgical strikes against Pakistan. It also retaliated against the Pulwama terror attack in which 40 CRPF jawans were killed by conducting air strikes in Pakistan’s Balakot,targetting the terror camps.

The Army chief further underscored the threat posed by "ideological driven radicalised proxies". He also stressed on the need to "reorient and optimise capacities to effectively counter both military and non-military facets of asymmetric and unconventional wars emerging from within and outside the country". "Ideological driven radicalised proxies having footprints across nations are likely to enhance the operating space," he further said.
