AIG Sindh says won't let any more honour-killings, 'karo kari' cases occur

Geo.tv/Illustration/Files

SUKKUR: The additional inspector-general (AIG) of police for Sukkur, Dr Jamil Ahmed, on Sunday vowed to put an end to uncivilised practices such as honour killing and karo kari.



AIG Dr Ahmed made the promise following an unusual rise in cases of violence against women (VAW) in various cities of Sindh, including Sukkur, Khairpur, Shikarpur, Larkana, Javobabad, and Kashmore, as well as towns in the province's upper side.



Speaking at a seminar organised by a local private university, the police officer vowed that he would not let any more cases of honour-killing or karo kari occur. His pledge was supported by Sukkur Police and members of the civil society.

"We have multiple cases, especially from central Sindh, where men murder women and throw their bodies in rivers, whereafter the bodies vanish," Dr Ahmed said.

"As of now, we have had 140 cases where we were able to register a proper FIR [first information report]," he added.



Also read: The state of Pakistan's human rights

Various speakers were of the opinion that ineffective legislation was the primary reason behind the unusual rise in VAW cases, including honour-killing and karo kari.

"Right now, the pressing problem is society's ruling elite. The sardars, the feudal lords, and waderas (landowners) are standing as strong barriers in this regard," said Dr Arfana Mallah, a professor at Jamshoro's University of Sindh and member of the Women Action Forum's (WAF) Hyderabad chapter.

On the other hand, author and journalist Mumtaz Bukhari said: "The best solution to this problem is a proper implementation of the rule of law.

"In addition, the state has already noted that it would file an FIR on its own behalf whenever a case of karo kari emerges but it does not happen practically," he added.

Some attendees, however, maintained that a change in the societal behaviour could also help put an end to the archaic traditions such as karo kari.

Read more:




