Power and its collaterals

Manohar Parrikar

Rohan Khaunte

Vijai Sardesai

Narendra Modi

Amit Shah

Kalyan Singh

Agreed, Goa is a tiny state that is as susceptible to Big Brother’s ploys and skulduggery as are those in the northeast. Over the years, the northeastern states, barring Assam and Tripura, were treated like Delhi's tenants, regardless of who ruled. Over time, these states learnt to circumnavigate the Centre’s chicanery by adopting a thumb-rule: vote for the national winner in a parliamentary election and preferably in the state polls too, and fence your interests from harm. Had Goa voted the Congress or the BJP with a majority in 2012, it could have saved itself from the unbecoming spectacles its politicians have staged in the past week.Apparently, the BJP-led coalition was not beset with survival threats. Strangely, however, the Delhi command, which operated through the young chief minister Pramod Sawant, had a problem with the Goa Forward Party (GFP) that gave the BJP the numbers it required to beat the Congress and seat its government. Ostensibly, the issue was the GFP was an ally of, the chief minister who died in harness and was perceived by people as bequeathing a “legacy” that did Goa good.On Delhi’s directive, Sawant – who represents a new line of state leaders such as Biplab Kumar Deb, Raghubar Das and Manohar Lal Khattar, beholden to the central command for their survival – asked the GFP to pull out its four ministers from the government as well as an Independent,, to quit., the GFP leader, who resigned as the deputy CM, mourned the “death” of Parrikar’s “legacy”, while Parrikar’s son, Utpal, who sought a Lok Sabha ticket but didn’t get one, said the “politics of trust” his father had fostered was “breached”.Their place was taken by the Congress renegades who cleaned out the party, leaving a shell that will not even provide a cover for it to qualify as an opposition party. Was it the objective to snuff out Parrikar’s “legacy” that pushed the BJP to consort with the Congress and dump a reasonably dependable GFP? The fear that Parrikar could share the roll of honour with the generation that came after Atal Bihari Vajpayee and LK Advani? Parrikar’s “legacy” was disputable because he never fulfilled his pre-poll promises to evict casinos and recover illegal mining money, issues over which he skewered the Congress when it ruled. Yet, his ability to make peace with dissimilar parties and leaders and ensure a modicum of stability in governance is counted as his enduring virtue.Congress defectors were understandably keen to grab a share of the ruling pie. Why did the BJP indulge in a bout of adventurism that was condemned by its own ranks because two of the newest inductees were beyond being just controversial? The deputy CM Chandrakant Kavlekar reportedly earned notoriety as a “matka king”, while Jennifer Monserrate is the wife of Babush Monserrate, who was accused of raping a teenager. The plethora of adverse notices heaped on the BJP by Goa’s RSS “pracharaks” and its longterm faithful on social media should causeandto ponder over the efficacy of their “Congress mukht Bharat” slogan. “Liberation” from the Congress comes at the cost of endangering their ideology and beliefs.The RSS and the BJP take immense pride in contending that if the political party stayed intact during the long years it spent in “vanvaas”, it was because of its adherence to ideology. From 2004 to 2014, the BJP was out of the Centre while trophy states like Uttar Pradesh and Maharashtra eluded its grasp. A month after losing the election and the Congress has unscrambled as an entity at the centre and in the states. The BJP remained where it was while in the opposition, occasionally losing a state satrap likeor Shankersinh Vaghela with no lasting damage. Mass migrations of the kind the Congress was subject to in Karnataka and Goa were unheard of.The BJP believed that it was “ideology” with a patina of “morality” that steadied the ship and gave the leaders the authority and credibility to challenge the Congress and Opposition on ethical issues. In the 2013 Delhi elections, the BJP fell four short of the halfway mark to form a government. The state leaders were yearning to split the Congress and get the numbers. But Modi – on a moral high before the 2014 elections – rejected their wishes and directed them to seek a fresh mandate. He did not wish to “taint” his own conduct by resorting to a strategy that might have even appeared justifiable or at least not egregious in those circumstances because the margin to get a majority was miniscule. He didn’t bite the bait but obviously Karnataka and Goa were too enticing to be passed up, ideology be damned.Power-sharing is tricky in the best of times but when it means apportioning huge slices to erstwhile political adversaries, it is humiliating. Humiliation is the worst thing a party can be subject to, in or out of power.
