Karnataka: Congress talks with rebel MLA MTB Nagaraj fails

As the crisis that threatens the survival of Karnataka government, ruling Congress-JD(S) coalition is trying every trick in the book to persuade rebel MLAs not to resign. The talks to convince Congress MLA MTB Nagaraj to stay part of the government failed on Sunday.

However, the embattled leaders continued with efforts to woo back some legislators who have resigned, especially seven time Congress MLA Ramalinga Reddy, ahead of Chief Minister H D Kumaraswamy's trust vote expected this week.

The coalition leaders received a major jolt on Sunday morning as Nagaraj, with whom they had held day long talks on Saturday in a bid to woo him back to save the government, flew to Mumbai and joined the rebel MLAs camped there.

After reaching Mumbai, Nagaraj, speaking to reporters, made it clear that there was no question of withdrawing his resignation and that he was "firm" on the decision.

Just ahead of leaving the city, the Hoskote MLA had told reporters that he intended to take a final decision on the withdrawal of his resignation after talks with Chikkaballapura MLA K Sudhakar, as both had together submitted resignations to the Speaker on July 10.

Visuals of Nagaraj boarding a chartered flight and BJP leader R Ashoka's presence in the vicinity had surfaced on local news channels soon after he spoke to the media, following which senior Congress leaders, including Minister D K Shivakumar had alleged that the saffron party was behind it.

Meanwhile, Karnataka BJP President BS Yeddyurappa on Sunday asserted that the Congress-JDS government no longer enjoys the majority in Karnataka Assembly and demanded that Chief Minister HD Kumaraswamy must face trust vote on Monday or step down from his post without wasting any more time.

The coalition government is on a shaky wicket with 16 MLAs -- 13 of the Congress and three of the JD(S) resigning their assembly membership.

Besides, two independent legislators, who were made ministers recently to provide stability, have quit the ministry and withdrawn support.

In order to bring its house in order, Madhya Pradesh chief minister Kamal Nath has been given the charge of ensuring that the shaky Congress-Janata Dal Secular government in Karnataka does not come apart at the seams and he was in the state all of Sunday in a bid to control the existing political turmoil here.

Meetings were also on in Congress circles at a hotel, where party legislators have camped under the leadership of CLP leader Siddaramaiah, who has convened the legislature party meeting on Monday morning.
