Mumbai: H1N1 kills woman, first death of season

‘Get vaccinated, even if you are healthy’

MUMBAI: A 26-year-old Govandi resident succumbed to complications arising out of suspected influenza H1N1 on Saturday, making her the first casualty of the viral disease since the monsoon 's onset. H1N1, formerly known as swine flu, has claimed four lives in Mumbai and 191 in Maharashtra this year.City physicians say they have also been treating many cases of fever and respiratory infections. "Cases of dengue and malaria are also there, but the numbers are not alarming as yet," said a south Mumbai doctor.The woman lived in New Bhim Nagar transit camp near Deonar and was diabetic. She was admitted to KEM Hospital, Parel, on July 8 with complaints of breathlessness. A senior doctor said she had developed acute respiratory distress syndrome, a life-threatening lung condition, besides testing positive for leptospirosis. After undergoing treatment at the medical ICU (MICU) for a few days, she died at 9.30pm on Saturday.BMC's executive health officer Dr Padmaja Keskar said the woman's death can be attributed to H1N1 or leptospirosis only after an investigation by the death review committee. The city, much like the rest of the state, started witnessing H1N1 cases since February when 39 confirmed cases were reported. It was followed by a surge in March (85 cases and two deaths). Cases continued to be detected in April, May and June.With the rains causing a spurt in respiratory infections, doctors caution that not just people with underlying health conditions, but also healthy individuals should consider vaccination. A cursory look at H1N1 deaths in the state this year throws a similar observation. An analysis of 188 deaths showed that more individuals without any associated diseases died of H1N1-induced complications compared to those with co-morbid conditions like hypertension and diabetes. Of the 188 people who died this year, 110 patients, or 58%, did not have any other underlying medical conditions."We have had similar findings even two years ago when two-thirds of H1N1 victims were healthy individuals. It tells us that irrespective of whether or not a person has underlying health problems, there shouldn't be any delay in seeking care," said infectious disease expert Dr Om Srivastava. He said that besides H1N1 and H3N2, there is a possibility that influenza B too could be circulating. "In influenza B, patients feel better, then suffer from symptoms again; it could go on for a few days. People, therefore, should see doctors and not self-medicate," he said.BMC has also carried out major drives to keep a check on leptospirosis cases after the city was flooded on several occasions and people had to wade through water. "Thousands of preventive doses of doxycycline have been distributed to check a leptospirosis outbreak," said Dr Keskar, adding that the July statistics are being compiled. An official confirmed that special health camps have been set up in areas in and around Govandi, where the deceased 26-year-old lived.
