Karnataka crisis: Rebel MLAs say no intentions to meet Mallikarjun Kharge, Ghulam Nabi Azad, urge police to make necessary arrangements to stop Congress leaders from meeting them

At least 14 rebel MLAs have written to the senior police inspector in Mumbai and expressed that they pose a threat from Congress leadership including Mallikarjun Kharge, Ghulam Nabi Azad. The rebel MLAs are likely to move the Supreme Court against the Congress leaders.

14 rebel MLAs have expressed that they pose a threat from Congress leadership as the party is trying to make arrangements to meet them in Mumbai. Reports said the 14 rebel MLAs will move to Supreme Court again against the Congress leaders who are trying to influence and convince the MLAs by their tactics. The rebel MLAs staying at Renaissance Hotel have written to Senior Police Inspector, Powai Police Station, against several Congress leaders including Mallikarjun Kharge, Ghulam Nabi Azad and others. The 14 rebel MLAs wrote: We’ve absolutely no intentions in meeting Mallikarjun Kharge, GN Azad or any Congress dignitaries from Maharashtra & Karnataka or any political leader as we anticipate the serious threat from them.

The letter further reads that they hereby request the police inspector to kindly make necessary arrangements to stop these people from meeting them in case the situation arises.

The legislators including Shivram Hebbar, B.C. Patil, Mahesh K, Vishwanath, Muniratnam, Narayan Gowda, R Shankar, H Nagesh, Pratap Patil, Gopalaiah, Ramesh J, MTB Nagraj, Somshekar, and Basavaraja have been cooped up in a Mumbai hotel. The MLAs urged the senior police official to make necessary arrangements to ensure that the leaders are not allowed to meet them.

Earlier, the apex court had asked the rebel MLAs to meet Speaker KR Ramesh Kumar and ordered the Speaker to decide the resignations by midnight. However, the Speaker’s counsel requested the court that he needs more time to check the resignation letters. Later, the court directed the Speaker KR Ramesh Kumar not to take any decision on the disqualification or resignation of 10 rebel MLAs till July 16.

Meanwhile, the BJP is continuously targetting the Congress-JD(S) alliance in the state. They have asked Chief Minister HD Kumaraswamy to resign and make way for BJP to form the government.

Mumbai: 14 rebel K'taka MLAs write to Sr Police Inspector, Powai Police Station. Write '…we've absolutely no intentions in meeting Mallikarjun Kharge, GN Azad or any Congress dignitaries from Maharashtra&K'taka or any political leader as we anticipate serious threat from them.' pic.twitter.com/RfI2Jt6d6D — ANI (@ANI) July 14, 2019

For all the latest National News, download NewsX App
