Kolkata puppies' murder: Accused girls rejoin college after bail; other nursing students support them

Protest being held in Siliguri in connection with the mass killing of 16 puppies in Kolkata on January 13. | Photo Credit: ANI

Kolkata: The two nursing students of NRS Medical College and Hospital, who were arrested on January 15 for the mass killing of 16 puppies, have resumed their classes. The accused students, Moutusi Mondal and Soma Burman, were released on bail after which they attended classes on Monday.

On being asked about the development in the case, Dwaipayan Biswas, Deputy Superintendent of NRS, told The Indian Express that a response from Swasthya Bhawan was pending. Earlier, the administration of the hospital had said that the girls would not be allowed to enter the campus until the investigation was over.

According to the sources, the accused girls were allowed to join the classes as the West Bengal Nursing Council (WBNC) did not object to it. After the girls rejoined their classes, protests were sparked outside Swasthay Bhawan.

Protest being held in Siliguri in connection with the incident where 16 dead puppies were found in the garbage beside Gynaecology Dept of NRS Hospital (Entally PS area) in Kolkata on 13 January. #WestBengal pic.twitter.com/7gus3UZRa7 — ANI (@ANI) January 16, 2019

Reportedly, nursing students and members of a nursing association were agitating continuously for the sterilisation of stray dogs on the campus and also for Mondal and Burman to be allowed to join classes. Several students who supported the accused girls refused to attend the classes.

The puppies were found dead and tied up in disposable bags in the parking lot of the college campus on January 13. Investigation revealed that the puppies and their mothers were lured with biscuits from different corners of the hostel premises into the backyard where they were confined inside a compound. The accused girls were identified by a security guard on January 15. After they confessed to having committed the brutal massacre, the girls were arrested by the police.

Also Read: Pune: Man rapes, kills 7-year-old girl in Dapodi to take revenge from girl's mother; hangs self later

Times Network - India's Leading Broadcasting Network, uniquely offering English Entertainment, best in class News channels & Bollywood Masala, available at a Value pack (7 channels) of Rs 13/- per month.

Please contact your cable/DTH service provider now and ensure that your TV viewing experience is complete. To know more click here.
