Pakistan will approach UN over #KashmirIssue, says PM Imran Khan

World

Pakistan will approach UN over #KashmirIssue, says PM Imran Khan

Pakistan will approach UN over #KashmirIssue, says PM Imran Khan

Written by Ramya Patelkhana Aug 06, 2019, 08:33 pm 4 min read

A day after India abolished Article 370, revoking Jammu & Kashmir's special status, and proposed to bifurcate it into two Union Territories, Pakistan on Tuesday held a Joint Session of its Parliament on Kashmir to decide the future course of action. PM Imran Khan, who addressed the Joint Session, said Pakistan will take up the Kashmir issue with the United Nations. Here's more.

Details 'Racist ideology of the BJP': PM Khan at Joint Session

"This session is not only important for the Kashmiri people and the Pakistani people, it will have repercussions around the world," PM Khan said, addressing the Joint Session of the country's Parliament. "We will take the case of Kashmir to the United Nations and apprise the international community of the treatment of minorities in India under the racist ideology of the BJP," he said.

Twitter Post Here's what PM Khan said at the Joint Session

Pakistan Prime Minister Imran Khan at the Joint Session of Parliament: We will take the case of Kashmir to the United Nations apprise the International community of the treatment of minorities in India under the racist ideology of the BJP. (File pic) pic.twitter.com/XW5FiXsB28 — ANI (@ANI) August 6, 2019

Quote 'India desires ethnic cleansing in Kashmir,' says Pak PM

In his address, PM Khan said, "They (India) want to further subdue and crush the freedom struggle of Kashmir. They want to institutionalize 'might is right'. India desires ethnic cleansing in Kashmir, along with demographic changes. This will incense the Kashmiris towards retaliation."

'Racist Ideology' 'They have a racist ideology': Khan on BJP

"This (abrogation of Article 370) is not a decision they (BJP) have taken out of the blue. It was part of their election manifesto all along," PM Khan said. "It is, in fact, ingrained in their ideology that puts Hindus above all other religions and seeks to establish a state that represses all other religious groups. They have a racist ideology," he said.

Quote India made us scapegoat: PM Khan on Pulwama attack

Pakistan PM Khan also said, "When Pulwama happened, we tried to make India understand that Pakistan was not behind this. They made us scapegoat of the (Indian General) elections... They still believe that India is only for Hindus."

Pulwama-like incidents Khan says India's move may create Pulwama type incidents

"They (BJP) have violated their own country's and international laws to (uphold) their ideology. With an approach of this nature, incidents like Pulwama are bound to happen again," Khan said at the Joint Session. "I can already predict this will happen. They will attempt to place the blame on us again. They may strike us again, and we will strike back," he added.

On war 'This is not nuclear blackmail,' says Pakistan PM

"They (India) will attack us... we will respond and the war can go both ways," Khan said. "But if we fight a war till we shed the last drop of our blood, who will win that war? No one...it will have grievous consequences for the entire world," he added. "This is not nuclear blackmail. We want the global leadership to take note," he said.

Time of dire need 'Kashmiris looking towards Pakistan in this time of dire need'

Special Assistant to Pakistan's Prime Minister on Information, Firdous Ashiq Awan, said, "Kashmiris are looking towards Pakistan in this time of dire need." "We would like them to know that they are not alone. We are looking to raise the matter in the United Nations and ask the forum to look into India's violation of their conventions," she added.

China Avoid taking actions that complicate border issue: China to India

Meanwhile, Pakistan's ally China also responded strongly to India's "unilateral" decision to reorganize Ladakh as a Union Territory. On Tuesday, the Chinese Foreign Ministry, in a statement, said, "We urge India to be cautious in its words and deeds on the border issue, strictly abide by the relevant agreements reached between the two sides, and avoid taking actions that further complicate the border issue."
