World must consider safety, security of India's nuclear arsenal in control of fascist, Hindu Supremacist Modi Govt: PM Imran

ISLAMABAD – Prime Minister Imran Khan has urged the World to seriously consider the safety and security of India's nuclear arsenal in the control of the fascist racist Hindu Supremacist Modi Government.

In a series of tweets on Sunday, the premier said that “India has been captured, as Germany had been captured by Nazis, by a fascist, racist Hindu Supremacist ideology & leadership. This threatens 9m Kashmiris under siege in IOK for over 2 weeks which shd have sent alarm bells ringing across the world with UN Observers being sent there”.

And the threat also extends to Pakistan, the minorities in India & in fact the very fabric of Nehru & Gandhi's India. One can simply Google to understand the link between the Nazi ideology & ethnic cleansing & genocide ideology of the RSS-BJP Founding Fathers. — Imran Khan (@ImranKhanPTI) August 18, 2019

“And the threat also extends to Pakistan, the minorities in India & in fact the very fabric of Nehru & Gandhi's India. One can simply Google to understand the link between the Nazi ideology & ethnic cleansing & genocide ideology of the RSS-BJP Founding Fathers,” prime minister Imran added.

In another tweet on the plight of Indian Muslims, the prime minister said that “Already 4m Indian Muslims face detention camps & cancellation of citizenship. World must take note as this genie is out of the bottle & the doctrine of hate & genocide, with RSS goons on the rampage, will spread unless the international community acts now to stop it”.

The World must also seriously consider the safety & security of India's nuclear arsenal in the control of the fascist, racist Hindu Supremacist Modi Govt. This is an issue that impacts not just the region but the world. — Imran Khan (@ImranKhanPTI) August 18, 2019

He urged the ‘World’ to seriously consider the safety & security of India's nuclear arsenal in the control of the fascist, racist Hindu Supremacist Modi Govt. This is an issue that impacts not just the region but the world.

The prime minister said that the Hindu Supremacist Modi Govt poses a threat to Pakistan as well as to the minorities in India & in fact to the very fabric of Nehru & Gandhi's India. He said that in order “to understand the link between Nazi ideology & the ethnic cleansing & genocide ideology of RSS-BJP Founding Fathers just Google”.
