India is making millions of Assam residents prove their citizenship

Millions of Assam citizens, many of whom have lived there their whole life, could face deportation or being put in detention centres, as India attempts to tackle illegal migrants.

The move threatens nearly two million people, mostly Bangladeshis who had informally and quietly settled decades ago, leading many human rights groups to call it a targeted campaign to disenfranchise and strip them of their rights.

The issue came to a head after 1.9 million people were left off India’s National Register of Citizens (NRC), which was published last month. The NRC is the tool India’s government is using to identify who is a ‘rightful’ citizen and who is not.

The freshest exclusives and sharpest analysis, curated for your inbox Email address is invalid Thank you for subscribing! Sorry, there was a problem.

It is also the latest episode in a 40 year on-again, off-again campaign against illegal migrants in Assam state. The South Asian Solidarity Group is calling the operation “ethnic cleansing on a massive scale”.

Bangladesh has not acknowledged emigration to India over the last few decades, but experts say the figures are significantly lower than the four to six million figures quoted by anti-immigration bodies in India.

This is made more challenging by Assam state’s location, as it is surrounded by Bangladesh to the south and west, with only a strip of land connecting it to the rest of India.

Political decision

Those left off the register now have about three months to appeal to Assam’s Foreigners’ Tribunals against their exclusion, but for many this is unrealistic due to living far away in rural areas and poverty. Often documentation is hard to come by in rural areas too, and if names are misspelt or slightly different in documents, that is enough to face exclusion.

Assam’s population is made up of Assamese-speaking Hindus and Muslims and a number of indigenous groups, who have viewed both the Muslim and Hindu immigrants negatively.

Nishant Upadhyay is completing a phD in South Asian relations at the University of Texas, and told i that Prime Minister Narendra Modi ‘s right-wing Bharatiya Janata Party (BJP), impacts the situation directly in both an opportunistic and ideological way.

Mr Upadhyay said that the NCR is a mixture of “long-standing paranoia and xenophobia with refugees and migrants, ethno-linguistic issue which is of a colonial origin, indiscriminate categorisation of Muslims in Assam as ‘outsiders’ and an agenda for defining citizenship for Hindus and Sikhs based on religion like Israel has for Jewish population globally”.

Why Assam?

He explained that the previous governments, led by Congress, deliberately failed “to develop a mechanism to accommodate and legalise these migrants and refugees into the national mainstream and citizenship due to state-level political pressure as well as a measure to appease population away from insurgency”.

He added: “This created a vacuum and an opportunity for BJP to act and undertake this as a measure indiscriminately against all Muslims.”

He added that in 2015/2016, many Asom Gana Parishad (AGP) members, a state political party fighting against illegal immigrants from Bangladesh, joined the BJP and began influencing policy on the NCR. This served both parties, as the BJP could “facade the Hindutva [an ideology seeking to establish Hindu dominance] ideal behind the cover of local demands and popular voices”.

A spokesperson for South Asian Solidarity Group told i: “The BJP has used these sentiments and compounded them with Islamophobia to set up the infrastructure to exclude Muslims on a vast scale.”

Moreover, there is now scope for similar action to be used in the rest of the country.

“The NRC is likely to be used in conjunction with citizenship laws which, we have been already been told, would welcome in Hindu refugees from neighbouring countries. This means that those excluded will be primarily Muslims. [President of the BJP] Amit Shah has stated that the NRC will be put in place in other states as well,” they explained.

Those impacted

When exploring the impacts of Assam’s politics, Mr Upadhyay likens it to three concentric circles.

In the first circle are Ahomiya Miyan Muslims who will be hit hardest, as despite being native to the land, they have to prove their right to remain. “Those who are poor or don’t have records at hand will be disenfranchised of their natural citizenship,” he explained.

In the second, migrants and refugees who had either one or two generations born and living in the domain of the Republic of India will also have their right to stay threatened.

In the third one is the greater idea that by the state fulfilling their agenda for itself it undermines separatist movements and leads to an “ideological succumbing of these states and their polities and agendas into the hands of Delhi”.

Humanitarian crisis

He called the situation tragic, as there is a “constant fear” among Muslims about their future.

“The state has ensured a total crackdown on the Ahomiya Miyan writers, poets, and journalists who tried to raise their voices against this injustice by filing case for sedition.

“Not only the voices are repressed but an indiscriminate series of violence is triggered which is manifested both systematically, putting many of the Muslims under state apparatus’s suspicion, and making them vulnerable to violence, threats, gender-targeted violence against women, violence against children, and even, leaving them vulnerable to kinds of trafficking.”

At this point, a number of groups are describing the situation as a humanitarian crisis.

“Already massive detention camps are being set up – most recently in Maharashtra. This is why we see it as ethnic cleansing on a massive scale.”

They added that the move disproportionately impacts married women as they will have moved from their parents’ homes to new addresses and often do not have the required documentation.

“Often one or two people in a family are excluded for no apparent reason. The most heart-breaking cases are those of young children excluded in this way.”

The Indian government has been approached for comment.
