West Bengal: Junior doctors call off week-long strike after Mamata Banerjee agrees to their demands

West Bengal CM Mamata Banerjee | Photo Credit: ANI

Kolkata: Junior doctors ended their week-long strike on Monday after meeting with West Bengal Chief Minister Mamata Banerjee. Banerjee accepted the proposal of the striking doctors' to set up Grievance Redressal Cell in state-run hospitals across the state. The Trinamool Congress (TMC) supremo also directed Kolkata Police Commissioner Anuj Sharma to deploy a nodal police officer in every hospital. The decisions were taken during the meeting with representatives of doctors at Nabanna, which houses the State Secretariat in West Bengal.

While announcing their decision to withdraw the strike, the junior doctors of NRS Medical College, Kolkata, said, "We extend our heartfelt gratitude to the CM. After an enormous movement, the meeting and discussions with our CM met a logical end. Considering everything we expect the government to solve the issues as discussed in due time."

"We extend our heartfelt gratitude to all seniors, juniors, patients, common people, intelligentsia and medical fraternity of the country who spontaneously extended their support and made this movement possible. We hope to maintain this unity in the future," added the junior doctors.

Jr doctors of #NRSMedicalCollege Kolkata: We extend our heartfelt gratitude to all srs, jrs, patients, common people, intelligentsia & medical fraternity of the country who spontaneously extended their support&made this movement possible. We hope to maintain this unity in future. pic.twitter.com/Q1CjBWqsgU — ANI (@ANI) June 17, 2019

The week-long stalemate between the West Bengal government and agitating junior doctors came to an end on Monday as Chief Minister Mamata Banerjee met the protesting medicos.

The protesting doctors of state-run medical colleges, on Sunday, had agreed to meet the chief minister to end the impasse. The doctors, however, demanded that the discussion with Banerjee should be held in the presence of media and not behind closed doors.

"We want an immediate end to this impasse by a discussion with the CM, which, to maintain transparency, shouldn't be behind closed doors, but open to media under camera coverage," a junior doctor said on Sunday.

Earlier today, Banjeree agreed for media coverage of her meeting with two representatives from each medical college of the state.

Junior doctors in West Bengal have been protesting since Tuesday against the assault on two of their colleagues by the relatives of a patient who died at Nil Ratan Sircar Medical College and Hospital in Kolkata on Monday night.

The strike, that entered its seventh day on Monday, has hit the medical services in the state. The agitation also got the support of other doctors across the country, including the Indian Medical Association and AIIMS.

The meeting between the junior doctors and Banerjee has been scheduled for 3 pm on Monday and will be held at a conference hall in the state secretariat. Doctors from 14 medical colleges across the state and 28 student representatives are expected to attend the meeting. As per reports, Banerjee had refused the doctors' demand to have a media presence during the meeting.

Earlier on Saturday, Banerjee had asked the agitating doctors to meet her at the state secretariat to resolve the issue, however, they turned down her invitation and asked her to come to the NRS College and Hospital for the meeting.

The doctors had also said that they would not meet the chief minister unless six of their demands were met, including CM's unconditional apology to the doctors of NRS College for her previous comments.

Arindam Dutta, a spokesperson of the joint forum of junior doctors, had told a news agency, "We are not going to the secretariat upon the invitation of the chief minister for the meeting. She will have to come to the Nil Ratan Sircar Medical College and Hospital and deliver an unconditional apology for her comments made during her visit to the SSKM Hospital on Thursday."

Banerjee, who visited the SSKM Hospital in Kolkata on Thursday, had alleged that “outsiders” are creating ruckus at the behest of the BJP and the CPI(M). She had also warned the protesting doctors to call off their strike.
