TV Actor and Wife arrested for Not Paying for Gold Jewellery

They had bought the jewellery on credit sometime in 2018.

TV actor Milind Ganesh Dastane and his wife Sayali were arrested on Tuesday, June 18, 2019, for allegedly not paying for their gold jewellery.

They were arrested following a complaint from Maharashtra-based jewellers PN Gadgil & Sons the week commencing June 10, 2019.

Dastane is a Hindi and Marathi actor and director. He is currently on the Marathi television show Tujhyat Jeev Rangala.

The jewellers have claimed that the couple has not paid the Rs. 25.6 Lakh (£29,000) bill for their purchase.

The Pune-based jewellers filed a complaint with Chaturshrungi Police Station.

According to the complainant, Dastane and his wife had gone to the shop and purchased diamond, gold and silver jewellery worth Rs. 25.6 Lakh (£29,000).

They had bought the jewellery on credit sometime in 2018. The couple said that they will make the payment once they sold off their property in Dombivali, Thane.

However, the couple allegedly did not make the payment. After a year of not paying for the jewellery, the owners of the business filed a police complaint.

After being arrested, the TV actor and his wife were produced before a magistrate who remanded them in police custody until June 21, 2019.

He has been in films like Khakee, The Legend of Bhagat Singh, Halla Bol, Majhi Baiko and Bola Alakh Niranjan.

Dastane has also directed the 2018 film Hichyasathi Kay Pan. His next film will be Shahid Bhai Kotwal.

This is not the first time where a TV actor has been arrested for allegedly committing a crime.

In 2015, Indian TV actor Sai Ballal was arrested for sexually harassing his female co-star Helen Fonseca.

She alleged that he molested her and sent her graphic pornographic content.

The actress did not respond to his WhatsApp messages and was allegedly invited to his house.

Fonseca warned him to stop contacting her but Ballal allegedly tried to force her into a physical relationship with him.

It is believed that the abuse took place on the set of their show Udaan.

Helen complained to the Colours production team but they fired her from the show.

In an interview, she said: “Sai would often send messages asking if I wanted to kiss him apart from sexually explicit videos.”

After she was sacked, Fonseca went to Cine and the TV Artistes’ Association (CINTAA). They advised her to contact the police.

Fonseca told the police who then arrested Ballal on July 15, 2015.
