Trouble mounting for P Chidambaram & son Karti Chidambaram

The troubles of former union minister P Chidambaram and his son Karti seem to be mounting with probing agencies finding more evidence against them. The Central Bureau of Investigation (CBI), Enforcement Directorate (ED), Delhi Police and Income Tax are probing more than a dozen cases against them.



In the Aircel-Maxis scam, a Delhi court on Monday extended till February 18, the interim protection from arrest granted to P Chidambaram and Karti. Special CBI Judge O P Saini extended the relief to Chidambaram noting that he will not be available on February 1. The case relates to alleged irregularities in grant of Foreign Investment Promotion Board (FIPB) approval in the Aircel-Maxis deal.



Last week, both, the CBI and ED had already told the Delhi High Court that they require custodial interrogation of Chidambaram in the INX Media case. Justice Sunil Gaur reserved the order on Chidambaram's anticipatory bail plea. Solicitor General Tushar Mehta told the bench that custodial interrogation of Chidambaram was necessary as he was evasive and had given false information during interrogation.



The Delhi Police has expedited probe into the FIR registered in connection with the four missing documents considered crucial in the Ishrat Jehan encounter killing probe. The FIR has been filed against unknown persons after the Union Ministry of Home Affairs approached the Delhi Police in September 2016. Though, no one has not been named in the FIR, former Home Secretary GK Pillai has alleged that P Chidambaram as Home Minister "bypassed him" and rewrote an affidavit submitted to a court on Ishrat Jehan.



Pillai had then alleged, "Chidambaram called a lower functionary in the Intelligence Bureau and totally rewrote the affidavit. The draft was dictated by him so no one else could say anything."



The documents missing from the North Block, include the Ishrat affidavit, amended by Chidambaram. Ishrat was killed along with three others in 2004 near Ahmedabad by police officers who claimed that she was part of a plot to assassinate then chief minister Narendra Modi. In 2009, the home ministry under Chidambaram submitted an affidavit in the Gujarat High Court that referred to Ishrat Jehan's alleged Lashkar-e-Taiba links, citing intelligence reports. Within a month, a revised affidavit was filed in which all references to Ishrat's alleged terror links were missing. The police is probing the motive behind the missing files.



In the Black Money Act case, Chidambaram's wife Nalini, his son Karti and daughter-in-law Srinidhi got reprieve after the Madras High Court on November 2, 2018 quashed the sanction orders issued by I-T officials to prosecute them. The three are being probed by the I-T department for having purchased a property in Cambridge, UK.



Nalini Chidambaram is also facing CBI probe in the Sharda Chit fund case. Both CBI and ED has registered cases into the matter.
