Delhi: Lover kills woman over suspicion of infidelity; slits her throat, dumps body in Badli area

preliminary investigation in the case has revealed that the woman was in a relationship with Anil who was also married | Photo Credit: Thinkstock

Key Highlights The woman's body was found in the Munak canal in Samaypur Badli area The woman was in a relationship with the accused , Anil who was married

New Delhi: A 32-year-old man has been apprehended by the Delhi Police for allegedly killing his lover on suspicion of infidelity on Thursday. The woman's body was found in the Munak canal near the Delhi Jal Board office in Samaypur Badli.

The deceased woman was a resident of Shalimar village and she used to work in a spa in Ashok Vihar area. The accused was identified as 21-year-old Anil. The Deputy Commissioner of Police (Outer North) Gaurav Sharma told news agency PTI that preliminary investigation in the case has revealed that the woman was in a relationship with Anil who was also married, for the past three years.

He added that the deceased was allegedly in a relationship with other men as well besides Anil. Meanwhile, during the interrogation, Anil committed to his crime and told police that he had taken the woman on his motorcycle to the Munak canal near Rohini Sector 18. Both of them consumed some alcohol and on finding the opportunity, he slit her throat with a blade, the police added. After killing her, he dumped the body into the canal.

However, a case was registered in the matter and the police have recovered Anil's motorcycle. Further investigation in the case is still underway.

In a similar case reported from Rajasthan, a man allegedly ran over a woman and her mother more than once and stoned them to death in Jodhpur district her marriage was fixed with someone else. After killing them, the accused jumped into a canal near Tiwari village of Osian area.

Prima facie it looked like, Sukharam had a relationship with the woman, Indra, and he wanted to marry her. Reportedly, Indra's mother fixed her marriage somewhere else. Irked over the mother's decision the accused planned to kill the woman and her mother. While Indra died on the spot, her mother succumbed to injuries en route to the hospital. However, the accused is yet to be traced.
