Moment 13ft python vomits out entire dog after swallowing it whole in jungle

The monster rock python was seen spitting out a whole dog in a forest at Udaipur, Rajasthan in India

Moment 13ft python vomits out entire dog after swallowing it whole in jungle

This is the shocking moment a snake vomits out a dog it had swallowed whole in a forest in India.

The harrowing video was captured by a group of wildlife enthusiasts while on a rescue mission in Udaipur in Rajasthan, when they noticed a large rock python squirming on the grass with a full belly.

The man who shot the video said: "On Wednesday morning, we were going on a rescue and on the way we saw some people disturbing a four-metre long Indian Rock Python that had eaten something.

"As we reached closer to the reptile, it was spilling out the kill which was a street dog."

The python ended up regurgitating the dog out, which snakes often do when they are stressed or feel a predator is lurking nearby.

Image: CATERS) CATERS) Image: CATERS) CATERS)

He added: “We saw some people disturbing a 13ft long Indian rock python that had eaten something.

"As we reached closer to the reptile, it was spilling out the kill which was a street dog.

“Python takes almost half an hour to swallow and they can swallow the prey more than its diameter because the jaw bones are not connected.

Image: CATERS) CATERS)

“But they regurgitate when they eat something they put all their energy in swallowing the food and sense a predator is nearby.

"By regurgitating the prey as soon as possible, the reptiles collect the energy and move away.”

Experts believe deforestation is affecting snakes' eating habits, forcing them to prey on dogs and goats for survival, the man said.

He added: "There have been several cases of python preying on goats and dogs in the recent past in Indian villages and snake experts believe the excessive deforestation is leading to serious imbalance in local ecological system forcing the reptiles and other wild animals to come closer to human habitat."
