How Many Rapes Is Too Many Rapes? When Does It End?

If you do a quick Google search for 'rape in India', this realisation will quickly dawn upon you--our country is super unsafe to live in. We might have had to ‘only’ deal with a cat call or two (it’s messed up that we've normalised this harassment) but even that is considered a privilege since ‘nothing major’ happened. Often touted as the rape hub of the world, India has already become notorious for subjecting its women and men to heinous conditions that only perpetuate more of such sexual crimes. So many reports of rapes and other sexual harassment behaviours get splashed in the news that unless they are sensational enough, they don’t even get the necessary coverage! Now, can you imagine the number of unreported cases?

The question is, how many rapes are too many rapes?

To understand the psyche of a rapist, it is important to understand how we deal with sex and everything around it in India. We’re not saying that all rapists out there have suffered from a stunted sexual development but, if seen closely, there are some commonalities. Not seeing women as people, believeing that women are inferior and without agency, machismo, objectification of women, patriarchy, and sexual taboos are some of the reasons why people choose to rape. When you take into account that mainstream films show it’s okay to objectify, assault, and harass women; that we get barely any sex education in the whole 14 years of school (no, we’re not talking about studying the reproductive process but sex education), and that for generations our society has perpetuated and fetishised a belief in the sanctity of virginity, the whole conversation around sexual assault gets skewed by partriarchy to an unhealthy degree.

Even after banning the process three years ago, doctors are still practising the invasive two-finger test on rape victims instead of using the prescribed government kit. The test examines the dilation of the vagina when two fingers are inserted in it to understand whether a woman is habituated to sex or not. The pointlessness of it is bewildering and is a testament to the fact that even the medical and legal establishment in our country still perpetuate highly misogynist standards.

The cyclical process that sustains this toxicity

There might be several new rules and regulations being put in place for ensuring women’s safety in the country, but the real reason nothing seems to be actually happening is because there is no real united front. Not everyone is committed to the cause. Even if there are independent groups and newer legislations, the country’s primary agenda includes a baffling number of problems. From the current economic slowdown to the giant bank mergers announced by Nirmala Sitharaman, the common people are naturally more concerned about where their next meal will come from rather than look out for their own safety.

Why we call it a cyclical process is because not only do people get away with heinous crimes because of money and influence, there are several victims who choose not to file complaints due to the deep shaming as well as threats that may come their way. Inevitably, there are serial rapists roaming free, no constructive conversation about sex, nor any proper reforms being implemented--all of this creates a super toxic environment that crosses its lines with politics and economics.

How do we stop it?

When three-year-old toddlers are getting raped, there isn’t much left to say about humanity. But, the least that you and I can do is ensure that we voice our opinions. If the guy in the Metro is staring at you for 15 minutes straight, make sure you give him a piece of your mind instead of letting it go. Complain to the HR about inappropriately behaved colleagues. Call out sexist behavior within your own friends and family circle. Let’s stop normalising even smaller and supposedly ‘harmless’ forms of sexism--the cat calling and staring, casual judging of women’s bodies, sexist wife and girlfriend ‘jokes’, etc. If someone has done anything wrong, it is better to speak up than to internalise it. It’s the only way to push this discussion forward in the right way.
