Mumbai: Man dies in police station; friend, kin claim cops beat him

While the family of the victim, Vijay Singh, and his friend, Ankit Mishra, who was detained with him, alleged that he was beaten in custody, the police said he was not assaulted and died while he was leaving the police station after being released.

A 26-year-old man died in the Wadala Truck Terminal Police Station after he was brought in for inquiry in an alleged assault case on Sunday.

While the family of the victim, Vijay Singh, and his friend, Ankit Mishra, who was detained with him, alleged that he was beaten in custody, the police said he was not assaulted and died while he was leaving the police station after being released.

Singh and Mishra — both residents of Koliwada — were picked up by the police on Sunday night, after they allegedly had an altercation with a couple at a petrol pump in the area.

“While we were filling petrol, there was a couple who was also present. They claimed that we purposely flashed the headlight at them, following which, they came charging at us,” said Mishra.

The petrol pump staff informed the police control room and a patrol van reached the spot and took both Mishra and Singh to the police station, which is located about 200 metres from the pump.

“The police officers started beating Vijay at the spot. They then took us inside a room at the police station and started assaulting us. Vijay complained of chest pain and even asked them for water, but the policemen refused. Later, at around 2am, when he fell unconscious, they rushed him to Sion hospital where he was declared dead,” said Mishra.

Rajendra Sangle, senior inspector of the Wadala Truck Terminal Police Station said, “There has been a dispute between the two groups for a long time. When they were fighting near a petrol pump, our patrolling staff noticed something unusual. They went to the spot and got them to the police station. Later, his (Singh’s) parents were informed and they were present at the police station. We didn’t even touch Singh. At midnight, when he complained of chest pain, we took his address, made him sign a document and let him go. When he reached the gate of the police station, he collapsed.”

The police said Singh’s family members then took him to Sion hospital in a taxi, where he was declared dead. “We got a call from the hospital. They informed us about Vijay’s death following which we sent a team and registered a case of accidental death,” added Sangle.

Mumbai Police PRO Pranay Ashok said the Crime Branch is conducting an investigation into the death.
