20-year-old, friend held hostage, raped; 10 booked

The vehicle of survivor’s friend.

LUDHIANA: The Dakha police have booked 10 unidentified miscreants for the alleged gang-rape of a 20-year-old student after holding her and her friend (20) hostage when they had gone to Issewal area on Saturday. The police are yet to arrest the accused.In her police complaint, she alleged that she, along with her friend, whom she knew for two years, were going from Sarabha Nagar area to Issewal in his car for chocolate day celebrations. She added that when they reached near the canal bridge in Changna, three motorcycle-borne miscreants, of whom one was wearing a turban, stopped their vehicle in front of their car around 8.30 pm.The complainant further said that the accused then surrounded them and then one of them threw a brick at the car while the other two caught the steering of the vehicle. She added that the trio then called their seven accomplices on two motorcycles.“The duo then took my friend to the back seat of the vehicle while the turbaned person forcibly took me in his lap. All accused then took us to a vacant plot. A few of them held my friend hostage in the car. Then they forcibly brought me out of the car and 10 unidentified accused committed the crime,” the complainant told cops. “Following this, they used the the phone of her friend to call up his friend for ransom. One of the accused demanded Rs1 lakh to release them. When no one came with money, around 2am on Sunday, they threw the keys of my friend’s vehicle and fled on their motorcycles.”The complainant later informed Dakha police about the matter. The police later booked the accused under Sections 376-D (gang-rape), 384 (punishment for extortion) and 342 (punishment for wrongful confinement) of the IPC.Ludhiana (rural) SSP Varinder Singh Brar said that the female and her friend had come to Dakha police station but initially told police that some miscreants had indulged in looting them after which they went home.He added that around Sunday evening, they again came to the police station, where the female stated that she had been gangraped.Senior police officer said that they had constituted six teams, including a CIA team, who were working on the case.“We are carrying out a search in the surrounding villages. We have got medical examination of the complainant done from the civil hospital in Sudhar, report of which is awaited,” said the SSP.
