Out on bail, UP rape convict tries to kill victim, sets her on fire; 5 arrested

The woman was allegedly raped in March and the accused had later been granted bail, they said. The victim and one of the prime accused were reportedly married last year, against the wishes of their families. (Photo: Representational)

Lucknow: A 23 year-old-rape victim from Unnao in Uttar Pradesh was allegedly set ablaze by five men, including one who was accused in the crime, police said on Thursday.

The incident took place on Thursday morning when the accused, out on bail, along with the help of four others, attempted to burn the woman by dousing her with kerosene in fields outside the village, News18 reported.

All the five accused have been arrested.

The woman, who was raped in December last year and is being treated in a Lucknow hospital, said in a statement that she was on her way from her village in Unnao district to Rae Bareli where the trial is going on when she was attacked and set ablaze early on Thursday morning.

Doctors attending on her at the Shyama Prasad Mukherjee Hospital here said she is in a 'very serious' condition.

"The condition of the girl who was set on fire and bought here at 10 am is very serious. She has 90 per cent burn injuries and we are taking utmost care," Medical Superintendent Dr Ashutosh Dubey told PTI.

When she reached the Gaura turn, near her home, Harishankar Trivedi, Ram Kishore Trivedi, Umesh Bajpai, Shivam Trivedi and Shubham Trivedi attacked her and set her afire. She alleged that Shivam and Shubham Trivedi had abducted and raped her in December 2018.

However, the FIR was registered in March. After she was set on fire, she ran for a while before eyewitnesses saw her and informed the police, which sent her to the Community Health Centre from where she was sent to the district hospital before being referred to Lucknow, police said.

Taking note of the incident, which made headlines across the country, Uttar Pradesh Chief Minister Yogi Adityanath directed senior police and state administration officials to visit the spot and submit a report by the evening.

The chief minister also told officials that the woman should be given the best possible treatment. He also asked the police to ensure strict action against the guilty and ensure their conviction in court, officials said.

Reacting to this incident, Priyanka Gandhi, questioned Union Home Minister Amit Shah and Uttar Pradesh Chief Minister Yogi Adityanath over the situation in Uttar Pradesh.

The accused had later been granted bail, Police said. The victim and one of the prime accused were reportedly married last year, against the wishes of their families.

NCP's Majeed Memon said that the rape survivor in Unnao has suffered 80 pc burns and is struggling for life. He further said the rape survivor had earlier made two complaints and yet she couldn't be protected.

Catch the latest news, live coverage and in-depth analyses from India and World. Follow us on Facebook and Twitter.
