Nirbhaya gang rape and murder: When students took to the streets – and the government took notice

Protests were carried out all across the nation following the rape and murder of Nirbhaya. | Photo Credit: PTI

Key Highlights Social media platforms were flooded with students issuing rallying calls to carry out candlelight vigils, and peaceful protests at police stations, and Parliament House Justice Verma's report was submitted in all of 29 days, and within 3 months an ordinance was passed to issue the death penalty to those convicted of rape Then Chief Minister Sheila Dikshit also ordered the creation of six fast track courts dedicated to hearing sexual assault cases just seven days after the incident

On December 17, Union Home Minister Amit Shah insisted that there will be no roll-back on the Citizenship Amendment Act. The home minister’s statement comes against the backdrop of several student protests that began over the weekend, first at Jamia Millia Islamia, and then at Aligarh Muslim University. What originally began as peaceful protests, have now turned sour with the Delhi and Aligarh police having used batons, water cannons, tear gas shells, and lathi charges to disperse crowds that allegedly took to stone-pelting. With reports of fresh protests erupting in Northeast Delhi’s Seelampur area, a swift resolution appears unlikely.

One needs only to look at the case of Nirbhaya (a name coined by agencies to protect the true identity of victim) to witness how student protests can energise the populace and urge the government to pay due heed. Following the brutal gang-rape and murder of a 23-year old - who came to be referred to as Nirbhaya meaning ‘Fearless’ - the nation erupted in protests led by numerous student organisations like the Akhil Bharatiya Vidyarthi Parishad and the CPI-M youth wing, Student Federation of India Bangalore, who not only demanded justice for the victim but also safety and protection for millions of Indian women. Social media platforms were also flooded with students issuing rallying calls to carry out candlelight vigils, and peaceful protests at police stations, and Parliament House.





The outpouring of grief and anger that the case of Nirbhaya triggered gave way to a sense of hope when the Central government soon commissioned then-Chief Justice of India JS Verma to produce a report with recommendations on how sexual assault cases must be treated. The report was submitted in all of 29 days, and within 3 months an ordinance was passed to issue the death penalty to those convicted of rape. A minimum sentence of 20 years for individuals convicted of gang rape was also mandated.

Then Chief Minister Sheila Dikshit also ordered the creation of six fast track courts dedicated to hearing sexual assault cases just seven days after the incident. While the effectiveness of the courts since the Nirbhaya case can be questioned, the fact that the number of rapes reported (registered) doubled the following year, suggests that the protests had awakened the country from a deep slumber in relation to crimes involving rape and sexual assault.

The aftermath of the Nirbhaya case also saw the creation of the Nirbhaya Fund by the UPA government in 2013, intended to support programs aimed at improving women’s safety. However, statistics show that between 2015 and 2018, only 20 per cent of state-allocated monies from the fund were used. Delhi, which laid at the very heart of the Nirbhaya protests, had used only 3.41 per cent of the total money allocated to it to compensate victims of gender-related violence.

Coupled with the horrific rape and murder of a 27-year old veterinary doctor in Telangana, and the stabbing and immolation of the Unnao-based rape survivor who died earlier this month, it is evident that the current preventative measures against sexual assault and rape are inadequate. The case of Nirbhaya and the protests that followed though, perhaps suggests that sometimes the voice of the collective can be impossible to drown out.



The views expressed by the author are personal and do not in any way represent those of Times Network.
