Lok Sabha elections to be held from April 11 to May 19

(MENAFN- Gulf Times) General elections in India will be held in seven phases between April 11 and May 19, the Election Commission said yesterday.

Counting would take place on May 23 and results would be declared the same day, said the commission, an autonomous body which oversees the world's largest democratic exercise.

Prime Minister Narendra Modi is seeking a second term.

His Bharatiya Janata Party (BJP) won a sweeping majority in the Lok Sabha, the lower house of parliament, in 2014, replacing a Congress-led government.

Along with the parliamentary elections, polling for state legislatures would be simultaneously held in Andhra Pradesh, Odisha, Arunachal Pradesh and Sikkim, Chief Election Commissioner Sunil Arora said.

The terms of their legislatures were ending in June.

Taking into account the security situation in Jammu and Kashmir, it has been decided not to hold state assembly elections there simultaneously.

Kashmir has been under federal rule after its coalition government collapsed in June 2018.

Elections in Bihar, Uttar Pradesh and West Bengal would be held in seven phases and Kashmir in five.

States where Maoist rebels are active would also see elections in multiple phases.

Arora told reporters that about 900mn voters would be eligible for the polls, about 15mn between the ages of 18 and 19 years.

Until a few weeks ago, a shortage of jobs and weak farm prices were seen as denting Modi's popularity.

But pollsters say the BJP has a clear advantage over opposition parties after India's armed forces clashed with those of Pakistan last month, triggering a wave of patriotic fervour across the country of 1.3bn.

The BJP and the main opposition Congress are the two strongest challengers among hundreds of political parties from across the culturally and geographically diverse country.

Modi, whose party won an outright majority in the 2014 elections, enters the race in a strong position, the 68-year-old remaining a popular figure and the BJP a well-oiled political machine.

In recent weeks he has been able to bolster his nationalist credentials in India's most serious standoff with Pakistan in years, sparked by a suicide bombing in Jammu and Kashmir on February 14 that killed 44 paramilitary troopers.

The deadliest attack on Indian forces in a 30-year-old insurgency in Kashmir was claimed by the Jaish-e-Mohamed militant group based in Pakistan, one of many that India and others have long accused Islamabad of harbouring.

Twelve days later the Indian Air Force bombed what New Delhi said was a training camp of the group deep inside Pakistan, the first time since 1971 that India hit territory beyond Kashmir.

Doubts have been raised about what the raid achieved, and when Pakistan carried out its own air raid a dogfight ensued and an Indian aircraft was shot down and its pilot captured by Pakistan.

Modi meanwhile has continued to talk tough, accusing the opposition of being weak on tackling terrorism.

'We won't spare anybody who is looking to destroy our country, Modi told a recent rally.

'But the oppositions have a problem with such stern actions too. But I am going ahead with my resolve to root out terrorism, he said in his home state of Gujarat.

The prime minister has also sought to contrast his humble origins as a tea seller against Congress president Rahul Gandhi, 48.

But opinion polls have suggested ebbing support for the BJP, and even that it may fall short of the 272 seats it needs to form a government on its own.

Gandhi, long criticised as a lacklustre leader, has also started looking more recently like a serious challenger.

Congress won three key state election victories in December, chipping into Modi's core support base in the Hindi 'Cow Belt regions home to nearly half a billion voters.

He has also gone on the offensive over Modi's economic record, with the Congress state wins attributed to the prime minister's perceived failure to help impoverished farmers and to create enough jobs.

But Modi touted his government's achievements in a series of tweets after the election announcement.

'I hope this election witnesses a historic turnout. I particularly call upon first time voters to vote in record numbers, Modi tweeted.

HSBC Securities and Capital Markets said in a note that national security and nationalism could trump economic issues in determining voters preferences.

India's unemployment rate in February rose to the highest since September 2016, data from private think-tank Centre for Monitoring Indian Economy showed, even as the economy grew at its slowest pace in five quarters in the last three months of last year.

MENAFN1003201900670000ID1098233711
