UP Dy Chief Minister mocks Congress, says Priyanka Gandhi's children will be next crusaders of 'Garibi hatao'

UP CM Yogi Adiyanath with UP Deputy CM Dinesh Sharma I Photo credit: PTI | Photo Credit: PTI

Lucknow: As the elections draws nearer, the statements issued by political leaders continue to reach new lows. Uttar Pradesh Deputy Chief Minister Dinesh Sharma is the latest entrant to hop on 'gaali politics' bandwagon. Sharma verbally dragged the children of AICC general secretary (UP East) Priyanka Gandhi into the political slugfest.

UP Deputy Chief Minister mockingly said Priyanka Gandhi's children will be the next generation of crusaders in fight against poverty. Taking a jibe at Congress, Sharma said the party has used 'garibi hatao (eradicate poverty)' slogan as a "ploy" to stay in power for many years.

'Garibi hatao' slogan was coined by the then Prime Minister and Congress leader Indira Gandhi in 1971 and the related poverty alleviation schemes around it helped the party secure a thumping win of 352 parlimentary seats in the next elections. The slogan was then adopted by Rajiv Gandhi.

Sharma mockingly said the Congress party has been trying to remove poverty since the days of Jawahar Lal Nehru - the first Prime Minister of India, after him Indira Gandhi, Rajiv Gandhi, Sonia Gandhi and now Rahul Gandhi and Priyanka Vadra are attempting to rule on similar pretext.

Sharma then went a step further and took a direct jibe at Priyanka and Robert Vadra's children, saying now they'll be next crusaders from Gandhi family in fight against poverty.

Many BJP leaders have attacked the Congress after the latter promised to implement its proposed Nyuntam Aay Yojana (NYAY), if voted to power. The later poverty alleviation scheme has proposed to give Rs 72,000 per annum to poorest families in India which makes up the bottom 20 percent of the population.

The proposed scheme is likely to cost Rs 3.5 lakh crore to the exchequer, which Congress president Rahul Gandhi said is doable. He said his party consulted various economists before formulating the NYAY. The Congress president while announcing the scheme at a press conference in New Delhi on March 25, described the scheme as "India's final assault on poverty".

The UP Deputy CM isn't new to controversial statements; he once said journalism started during Mahabharata --a Hindu epic. He made the statement at an event organised on the 'Hindi journalism day' in May 2018. Sharma even have instances to butress his claim.
