Chennai: Mentally retarded minor girl kidnapped and gang-raped

The 15-year-old girl was abducted from near her house in Chinna Kanchi on Saturday evening by auto driver Raja and three of his friends, who drove the girl to a vacant land with bushes and trees, near a prominent landmark, which was deserted. (Representational Image)

Chennai: In yet another horrific incident of sexual violence in Chennai, a mentally retarded minor girl was allegedly abducted and gang-raped by four men near Kancheepuram. Police arrested two of the accused and have launched a search for the other two.

The 15-year-old girl was abducted from near her house in Chinna Kanchi on Saturday evening by auto driver Raja and three of his friends, who drove the girl to a vacant land with bushes and trees, near a prominent landmark, which was deserted. They then took turns to rape her. The girl was left there the men fled the spot, said a senior police officer.

The girl was playing near her house when the accused abducted her. Subsequently, the victim’s parents lodged a missing complaint with the Vishnu Kanchi police after searching for her.

Police sources said a special team of police was formed to find the girl. Meanwhile, on Sunday evening the Vishnu Kanchi police were informed that a girl was found lying unconscious near the bushes in Thirukalimedu in Kancheepuram. Police rescued the girl and admitted her to the Kancheepuram medical college and hospital for treatment. Police, quoting doctor, said the girl was gang-raped and had sustained severe internal injuries.

The case was then transferred to Kancheepuram all women police station who retrieved the CCTV footages from the area and found the auto used to

kidnap the girl. With the help of the footages, police on Monday arrested Raja, 25, the owner of the auto and his friend Deva, 27 of Thirukalimedu under Pocso Act.

Police have seized the auto used for the kidnap.

They were remanded and lodged in Vellore prison, police said. An Investigation revealed that Raja’s friend Dinesh was known to the victim’s family and he had hatched the plan to kidnap the girl. Police are searching for Dinesh and his friend Aravind who have gone into hiding missing after the incident.

Nearly six months ago, a hearing-impaired girl 11-year-old child had been sexually assaulted by multiple men at a gated community in the Ayanavaram area.
