Both PM Modi and I have gone through tremendous torture: Sadhvi Pragya

Bharatiya Janata Party (BJP) Bhopal candidate Sadhvi Pragya Singh Thakur on Friday said that both Prime Minister Narendra Modi and she have gone through torture at the hands of the Congress. Sadhvi Pragya's response came after PM Modi accused the Congress of spreading lies, accusing leaders of crimes they have not committed.

In an exclusive interview to India Today TV, Sadhvi Pragya said, "Congress has done whatever injustice has happened. When Narendra Modi was Gujarat's chief minister, Congress accused him of various crimes but he was later proved innocent. In the same way, Congress has tortured me for nine years. Both Modiji and I have gone through torture."

Intensifying her attack on the Congress, Sadhvi Pragya said that both Narendra Modi and she are the symbols of how Congress has tortured and oppressed people and reign in fear. "They [Congress] have always crushed the patriots and called them terrorists. This is why the public will oppose them [in the 2019 Lok Sabha election]," Sadhvi Pragya said.

On PM Modi, Sadhvi Pragya said that the Congressmen are afraid of patriotism and patriots. "PM Modi travels around the world and the Congress is afraid what would this man [Modi] do if he is elected to power again. Congress is afraid of patriotism and patriots."

In an exclusive interview to Aaj Tak, PM Modi, on being asked why 2008 Malegaon blast accused Sadhvi Pragya was given a ticket to contest the Lok Sabha election 2019 from Madhya Pradesh's Bhopal, said that he, too, was "accused of many things" and it was Congress.

"If you search the social media, you would find lakhs of pages against me. As an effect, even the United States denied me a Visa. When the truth was revealed, the United States itself sent me an invitation. So, Congress has been running a modus operandi to spread lies and the habit does not go. Recently, Kapil Sibal organised a press conference against the Electronic Voting Machines (EVMs) in the United Kingdom. Congress has spread lies on demonetisation, too. Congress follows a procedure to spread lies and accused others without any proof. It ruins lives," PM Modi said.

He added that Congress went to the court against the candidature of Sadhvi Pragya but even the court said that she can run the elections. "Congress maligned the country's image by coining the term Hindu terrorism. They called me a chowkidar and I took the challenge to shut them up," the prime minister said.
