Drug dealers abduct, brutally assault music composer over financial dispute in Bengaluru

Five kilograms of ganja was recovered from the home of an accused (Representative Image) | Photo Credit: BCCL

Bengaluru: Police in the state capital of Karnataka has registered a case against ten members of an alleged drug distribution racket for abducting and assaulting a 24-year-old music composer from Kerala. As per the latest reports, six out of the ten members have been arrested and a search operation has been launched to nab the remaining miscreants.

In his statement, the victim, one SS Madhuban, said that he got into an argument with the assailants over a financial dispute which led to the incident. City police officials familiar with the matter said that Madhuban was abducted from his home in Koramangala on April 22. The assailants barged into his home and snatched mobile phones, cash, ATM cards, and an electronic gadget that were in Madhuban's purse. They then blindfolded the composer and threatened his friends not to report the matter to the police.

He was taken towards Sarjarpura Road where his captors halted at multiple ATM kiosks and forced him to reveal his pins, reported Bangalore Mirror. However, he was severely assaulted with a sharp weapon when he refused to entertain their demand. Madhuban was then pushed out of the car onto a barbed wire on the KR Puram-Avalahally Road where passerby spotted him and rushed him to a nearby hospital where he is currently undergoing treatment.

What is shocking is that the victim was hesitant to file a complaint since the case involves medico-legal tests. Despite his attempts, police officials recorded Madhuban's statement and arrested six of the ten gang member. As a result, a four-wheeler, cash and five kilograms of ganja was also recovered from various hideouts of the gang members. An official told media outlets that the victim and the accused have given different versions but it is clear that those arrested were operating a drug distribution racket in the city.
