Maharashtra: Medical students won’t be taught deplorable ‘2-finger virginity test’ anymore

The MUHS panel decided to remove the chapters from the medical textbooks after a plea was filed demanding scrapping of the 'test'.

Mumbai: In a major decision, the Maharashtra University of Health Sciences (MUHS) has decided that the controversial ‘virginity test’, or ‘two-finger test’ will no longer be taught to medical students in the state.

The MUHS panel decided to remove the chapters from the medical textbooks after a plea was filed demanding scrapping of the 'test'.

According to a report in Times of India, the petitioner, who is a doctor from Wardha, called the test as unscientific and violation of human rights. The doctor also said that the test doesn't in any way aid a sexual assault probe.

The decision was taken in April. And perhaps Maharashtra is the first state to take such a decision.

“Yes, a preliminary decision to remove the two-finger test has been taken. The recommendation will be placed before the academic council. The test has long been found to lack a scientific basis,” the e report quotes Dr KD Chavan, registrar, MUHS.

A forensic medicine at Mahatma Gandhi Institute of Medical Sciences, Sewagram, Dr Indrajit Khandekar had earlier written to Medical Council of India, Union health ministry and MUHS questioning the so-called 'virginity test'. Khandekar said teh chapters in teh books only talks about female virginity, its internal and external signs and role of hymen.



“The test is completely unscientific, and leads to gender discrimination and character assassination of a woman. There is no research that says the test can conclusively say who is a virgin and who is not. On the contrary, studies have shown that an inspection of the hymen cannot give conclusive evidence of vaginal penetration and that abnormal hymenal features such as laceration or an enlarged opening can be found with or without a history of sexual activity,” TOI quotes Dr Khandekar as saying.

Meanwhile, forensic experts have hailed the decision to review the curriculum. Dr Rajesh Dere, professor and head of forensic medicine at Sion Hospital, said it is time to do away with such test.
