MLA’s son booked for threatening BJP office-bearer over Facebook post

SURAT: Police booked Kamrej BJP MLA V D Zalavadiya’s son Sharad for allegedly threatening a member of Surat district BJP working committee on Thursday. Police registered a non-cognizable offence but the complainant alleged that under pressure from the MLA, they did not register a regular offence. In non-cognizable offence, police have to take approval of court for any action but in regular FIR, they can on their own act against the accused.Sharad Zalavadiya was booked on a complaint by Rajendra Vasani, whose wife Anita is sarpanch of Pasodra village. He has been booked under Indian Penal Code section 504 (intentional insult with intent to provoke breach of the peace).Vasani had posted a comment on his Facebook wall on August 2 in Gujarati which asked, “Did you see the school’s condition and if seen, how much time it will take to resolve the issue?” MLA Zalavadiya had visited a school in Laskana and its building happened to be in a dilapidated condition.The complainant alleged that Sharad had threatened him of dire consequences on August 3. “Sharad had threatened and abused me over phone for my Facebook post and under pressure from his MLA father, police did not register my complaint as regular FIR. I was threatened and hence I approached police,” Vasani said.“Sharad was booked at Sarthana police station in February 2018 for allegedly threatening a man over phone. He also threatened a police inspector of Puna police station in the city with suspension when police arrested some people known to him,” Vasani.Sharad claimed that he had not threatened the complainant but called him to discuss with him why was he posting insulting material on social media. “The allegations are false and I did not call to threaten or abuse him. He was posting comments about my father and I felt insulted. I called him to tell him he should not be doing this. I was very respectful towards him but he wants to defame us,” Sharad said.“Police have registered an NC offence and further action in the matter will be taken after approval from court. We will submit investigation report in the court,” said a police officer of Sarthana police station.
