India ready to face any threat: Kishan Reddy

Union Minister of State for Home tells people to be united and celebrate Bakrid with happiness

Responding to threats from Pakistan, Minister of State for Home Affairs G Kishan Reddy said that all precautions are being taken to safeguard Indian borders.

“We are prepared to face any kind of situation that arises in India,” Mr. Reddy said on the sidelines of a seminar on ‘Cyber Security and Image Processing’ organised by The Institution of Engineers on Saturday.

On Thursday, Pakistan Prime Minister tweeted: The whole world is waiting to see what happens to oppressed Kashmiris in IOK when curfew is lifted. Does the BJP govt. think by using greater military force against Kashmiris in IOK, it will stop the freedom movement? Chances are it will gain momentum.

Mr. Reddy said that people are united and that a few parties and people from Pakistan are trying to drive wedge between them.

Speaking on the situation in Jammu and Kashmir, Mr. Reddy said that the Section 144 (CrPC) is lifted in many parts. He requested people to be united and celebrate Bakrid with happiness.

Mr. Reddy said precautionary measures were taken as Pakistan is trying to instigate people by making irresponsible statements, while some parties are looking at it from perspective of politics rather than national interest.

“At times, there were curfews in Jammu and Kashmir for 30 to 40-days at a stretch. Now there are no more curfews, there are no difficulties there. In Jammu and Kashmir, as you saw on TV, people and youth are happy. They wish for a change in their lives,” he said.

The Minister said that people of Jammu and Kashmir were suppressed for the past 70-years with Article 370. He said that by revoking the law, there is chance of people joining mainstream.

Smart fencing

Mr. Reddy said that smart fencing on Indo-Pak international border at Jammu and Kashmir has started.

"These projects have got hi-technical surveillance system that create an invisible electronic barrier on land, water, air, and underground -- and help the border guarding force to detect and foil infiltration bids in most difficult terrains," Mr. Reddy said.
