Irresponsible talk: Instead of nuclear sabre rattling, Pakistan should accept reality on Kashmir and move on

TOI Quick Edits are written by a team of seasoned journalists from the Times of India's Edit Page and TOI-Online who respond to important news stories as they develop. The team comprises senior journalists with wide-ranging interests who debate and opine on the news and issues of the day. LESS ... MORE

Pakistani PM Imran Khan has resorted to the customary Pakistani stratagem of nuclear sabre rattling, by stating that both his country and India are nuclear weapon states and that the onus lies with the UN to intervene in Kashmir, implicitly in the manner Islamabad wants. Such nuclear blackmail, unfortunately, will only reinforce Pakistan’s reputation as a rogue state. The truth is Pakistan has not got the kind of backing it was hoping for on Kashmir. The UN Security Council only held a closed-door meeting without an official statement as most countries want Kashmir to be resolved bilaterally between India and Pakistan.

US President Donald Trump who had previously pitched for mediation in Kashmir recently changed position at the G7 meet with Prime Minister Narendra Modi and backed New Delhi and Islamabad to talk it out. Plus, none of the Gulf Muslim nations – traditionally seen as benefactors of Pakistan – has backed Islamabad on Kashmir. Instead, countries like UAE and Bahrain have been strategically moving closer to India.

Given this scenario, Pakistan’s elite would do well to accept reality. If it genuinely wants to help Kashmiris it should stop the terrorism emanating from Pakistan, which would enable New Delhi to de-militarise J&K and restore normalcy. Islamabad should, therefore, re-evaluate its position — it is only digging itself deeper into a hole by burning resources on Kashmir and losing opportunities for economic development. It would be far better for the whole region if Imran Khan took up Modi’s challenge of fighting poverty and illiteracy in both countries. Threatening nuclear war will only bring down more opprobrium for Pakistan. It’s time Islamabad woke up and smelt the coffee.

Read Now: Will raise Kashmir issue at every international forum: Pakistan PM Imran Khan

Read Now: Imran says time for Pak’s Kashmir policy to take ‘decisive’ turn, warns world of nuclear danger

Facebook Twitter Linkedin Email
