Imran Khan’s UN speech

PRIME Minister Imran Khan delivered an emphatic address to the United Nations General Assembly on Sept 27 that made the world sit up and think.

The focus of his speech was on Islamophobia and the occupation of Kashmir. and he spoke with such conviction that the audience applauded him a number of times during his speech. All the talk about radical Islam in the Western world was brilliantly shot down by PM Imran, saying that there was only one true Islam.

The Pakistani prime minister systematically exposed the Indian mindset on Kashmir.

He told the world Narendra Modi is a lifetime member of the fascist RSS, an extremist Hindu organisation that was behind the murder of Mahatma Gandhi in 1948. It was this ideology that drove Narendra Modi to massacre around 2,000 Muslims in Gujarat in 2002. Now it is the same ideology that is behind the Indian government’s lockdown in Kashmir.

After his speech the world community must now act.

Muneeb Faisal

Lahore

(2)

THE Prime Minister’s speech can be rated as one of the best given at the UN. He has turned the table on India. His speech not only stunned the Indian representatives sitting in the hall but electrified the international community sitting in that august world forum.

The impressive part about this speech is that he spoke extempore for 50 minutes without a single fumble. He had full command over language as well as substance and exhibited unflinching sincerity and conviction about what he was saying.

Prime Minister Imran Khan warned India that if a war was forced upon Pakistan, Pakistanis would fight to the bitter end. There was pin drop silence while he spoke only to be interrupted by thunderous applause .No doubt Imran Khan is a born leader and outstanding speaker.

Safir Siddiqui

Karachi

(3)

WHENEVER a leader is to speak at a global forum, he has some points on paper which are referred to during the speech. At the UN General Assembly we saw our prime minster speak extempore and well for more than 45 minutes.

He started the global issues and deliberately kept Kashmir till the end. He told the world how America promoted terrorism through its policies. And he made Muslim leaders think that to what sorry pass the ummah had come. In my opinion the Muslim world has found a spokesman after Recep Tayyip Erdogan.

Muhammad Ibrahim Memon

Dadu

(4)

IMRAN Khan’s speech in the UN proves that he is a strong, selfless and fearless leader of not just Pakistan, but all Muslims. That is not all; he made a strong case that the Muslims are one of the biggest supporters of human values.

He drew the world’s attention to issues like climate change, money laundering, terrorism and Islamophobia and then spoke about the Indian brutality in occupied Kashmir.

His speech tells the world that when one is honest and determined it inspires others to be more committed and passionate. Pakistan is lucky to have a leader like Imran Khan.

Urooj Fatima

Hyderabad

Published in Dawn, September 29th, 2019
