Pakistan warned to ‘stop terror camps’ or India will enter the region to ‘destroy’ them

India Pakistan: Captured pilot freed by military on Wagah border

top stories direct to your inbox SUBSCRIBE Invalid email Sign up to receive our rundown of the day'sdirect to your inbox We use your sign-up to provide content in ways you've consented to and to improve our understanding of you. This may include adverts from us and 3rd parties based on our understanding. You can unsubscribe at any time. More info

Earlier this year, the two countries came close to war following a series of skirmishes from either side. At the heart of the bubbling tensions is the contested Jammu and Kashmir region.

India has long accused the region of being a hotbed of terrorism and on Sunday, launched several attacks on terrorist launchpads in the region after reported fire by the neighbouring country. Following those attacks, the governor of Jammu and Kashmir, Satya Pal Malik said on Monday that India would enter the country to go “inside and destroy” the terrorist camps if the attacks continued. Speaking to reporters, Mr Malik said: “Pakistan will have to behave and stop these terror camps. “If it does not behave, we will go deep inside and destroy these camps.”

India-Pakistan: India issues threat

India-Pakistan: Imran Khan

The Indian army confirmed “several terrorists” had been killed but also that “six to 10” Pakistani military members had also been killed during the recent attack. India’s, army chief, General Bipin Rawat told The Times of India: “Six to 10 Pakistani soldiers have been killed in our firing. “A similar number of terrorists have been killed and three out of the four launch pads were destroyed. “The casualty number could be much higher. JUST IN: India-Pakistan nuclear war to send world back to ‘Ice Age’

India-Pakistan: Wreckage from the recent attack

“Instead of waiting for the terrorists to infiltrate, we decided to target the launch pads since we had the coordinates for them.” India’s Prime Minister, Narendra Modi revoked Article 370 in August, a section within the Indian constitution which guarantees special status to Kashmir and Jammu, thus reinitiated the conflict between the two states. The reason for his decision was down to alleged terrorist activity, in particular, an attack in the Kashmir region which killed 44 Indian paramilitaries. Following that attack, the India Prime Minister called an airstrike on a camp run by the militant organisation known as Jaish-e-Mohammed. DON'T MISS

India warned Pakistan is 'beefing up security' - 'On brink of war' [Latest]

Pakistan-India: Modi threatened with ‘nuclear armageddon’ [Latest]

India-Pakistan tensions surge as war-games undertaken at border [Latest]

India-Pakistan: Imran Khan

India-Pakistan: Modi at the recent rally

However, two Indian jets were shot down in Pakistani territory with one including pilot, Abhinandan Varthaman, who as then paraded in front of state television before being returned to India. During the United Nations General Assembly last month, Pakistan’s Prime Minister, Imran Khan indicated that the recent clashes had been the closest the two countries had come to a nuclear war. He said: “It is the only time since the Cuban crisis that two nuclear-armed countries are coming face to face.

Countries with nuclear weapons

“We did come to face to face in February.” Following the trend of a potentially catastrophic nuclear war between the two states, a recent report published in Science Advances earlier this month stated that the death toll could rise to 125 million in the event of nuclear warfare. The report stated: “India and Pakistan may be repeating the unfortunate example set by the United States and Russia during the ‘cold war’ era: that is, building destructive nuclear forces far out of proportion to their role in deterrence.

India-Pakistan: Donald Trump

Trending
