30-yr-old injured in celebratory fire

Ludhiana: A 30-year-old man from Kurukshetra sustained injuries at a wedding function when an unidentified man opened fire in the air in New Janta Nagar. The injured, who could not fathom why he was suddenly bleeding, was rushed to a private hospital in Civil Lines, where doctors confirmed that it was a gunshot injury.

Victim Baljinder Singh, who had come to the city to attend the wedding of his cousin, refused to lodge a complaint, but the Shimlapuri police are investigating the matter.

SHO inspector Davinder Singh said on Tuesday the police got information from the hospital authorities and have recorded the statement of the injured, who told that the incident happened during the sangeet ceremony of his cousin on Sunday night. “Baljinder told that during the function suddenly something hit him and he started bleeding. The family rushed him to a hospital. The medical reports ascertained that it was a splinter injury caused by a gunshot,” the SHO added.

The inspector said, “It is a criminal offence to open fire in the air and a person can be booked under Section 336 (act endangering life or personal security of others) of the IPC, besides the Arms Act. The police are investigating to know who opened fire during the function.”

Some fingers were pointing to the nephew of a Congress worker, but the SHO said, “The police have not got any name. The matter is under investigation.”

Refusing the allegations, the Congress worker said neither he nor his nephew attended any marriage function in the recent days.

Box

GUN LAWS

In 2016, after a dancer, Kulwinder Kaur, was killed in a celebratory fire at a wedding in Bathinda, then director general of police Suresh Arora had issued orders prohibiting carrying of firearms at functions

Under Section 144 of the CrPC, the commissioner of police has also banned carrying of weapons at weddings and other functions

Firing in the air is a criminal offence and an FIR can be lodged under Sections 336 (act endangering life or personal security of others) of the IPC and the Arms Act.

Orders issued by the Punjab’s department of home affairs and justice, in March 2018, said that while issuing new arms licence or renewal, an affidavit must be taken that the applicant will abide by restrictions on carrying of arms and not carry them during marriages and other functions

TIMES VIEW

There are numerous instances of people losing their lives or getting injured due to celebratory firing in the air during marriages and parties, yet people never seem to learn. The falling bullets pose great danger to those in the vicinity of the person firing in the air as well as cause damage to property by shattering glass or chipping plaster on the walls. According to experts, a spent bullet falls back to Earth with a speed of 90-180 metres per second, and even one moving at less than 60 metres per second can cause a fatal skull injury. Governments and local authorities need to to launch educational programmes or run jingles on FMs to discourage trigger-happy partygoers.



Facebook Twitter Linkedin EMail
