Imran, Lies, Nukes and the Terrified Pak Top Brass

Imran, Lies, Nukes and the Terrified Pak Top Brass

Well, as we had expected, the same thing happened.

The puppet PM acted as if he calls the shots. He is the boss.

But the world knows that he is just warming the PM’s chair but is made to dance by the Puppeteers, Pak Army and ISI.

They are still wondering How on earth did a MIG 21 Bison hit a sophisticated F-!6 Falcon and also gave chase to another one?

Our Great War hero bowled a huge unplayable bouncer to one F-16 which crashed. Then another one evaded the next lethal bouncer, but His follow through, unfortunately, took him to POK.

Great son of the soil!

Abhinandan Varthman is made of sterner stuff. His courage in Pakistan, His answers to Paki Major’s questions, His very standing tall, calm composure and dignified self in a captive situation was very laudable.

He was not nervous. He was beaten up and had bruises by locals. Still, He was not afraid!

Well, every soldier during training is taught how to face the unruly mob. How to face the enemy soldiers.

Nothing new.

FieldMarshal Cariappa’s son was also held captive, later released. Also the Kargil hero Squadron Leader Nachiket.

But, Pakistan now, is isolated from the world. Iran and Afghanistan are baying for its blood.

Modi has in these 4 ½ years travelled the world, met the powers to be in the world and has successfully sung hymns of Pakistan’s terrorist organization and its patronage to them.

His rhetoric has been bought by the USA, Russia, France, Germany etc. China unwillingly being a fence sitter still shook its head in the affirmative.

Today’s, Imran’s new Pakistan is new wine in old bottle.

All ideologies, terror tactics, hatred against India are the same. There is only a proclamation of New and talks about peace with India.

The economy in today’s situation in Pakistan is very bad. The populace is agitated. The hawkers who sell wares on carts also possess guns.

I recall someone saying Dawood can’t do any extortion in Pakistan, as “TheTehlewalllahs “ (Cart Hawkers) all have guns. Forget about the upper echelons in society.

This is the stage of Pakistan today. Jobless youth indulging in terrorism.

Take Kasab, he was a jobless youth, was induced and inducted in the Jihadi camp. Was trained to become a suicide machine.

Similarly, lacs of youth are volunteering or are brainwashed.

26/11 attack was the worst after the Indian Airlines hijacking to Kandahar. Apart of so many train Blasts, parliament attack, suicide attacks etc etc.

The Indians and the world tolerated for years before Modi ordered the hit on JEM bastion.

Pakistan had no option but to retaliate, but our Pilot, unfortunately, became captive.

Pak thought they got a bait, but the international community, Trump, Beijing and Modi administration said nothing doing, ordered unconditional release of our war Hero.

We have a Great NSA in the honorable Mr. Ajit Doval.

Pakistan does not have a great brain like him.

He was in Pakistan for 7 years disguised as a Maulvi. The brave and intelligent Spy that he is very cleverly turned the tables on Pak!

Modi’s best gamble of making him the NSA paid rich dividends!!

He knows Pakis and their mentality in and out. Anyone interested can check his YouTube videos of his speech and his valor in exposing Pak.

Imran and Pak army got the jitters!!

They announced the release in no time.

As the saying goes, that the person knocked down will say still my nose is in the air.

The treacherous Pak delayed the release by several hours. Wanted to make a show off to the world. Got the Pilot’s interview under duress and released on all media in Pak and then let him off at 9.20 pm.

Pakistan Tried to get maximum mileage out of the situation.

Under Geneva Convention, they cannot keep a POW more than 7 days in captive.

We returned 90,000 soldiers captured in Bangladesh during 1971 war.

The nuke story is very laughable

Pakistan threatens they have Nukes, They are a Nuclear power. Who cares….?

Only Nuclear bombs in the world’s history were the two boys. .Hmmm thrown down on Hiroshima and Nagasaki!! Thus bringing Japan to its knees!!

It reminds me of so many Industrialists, Builders, Politicians right down to the level of Corporators get the license and possess guns.

Great going!!

But, seldom they can use. Forget using, they cannot even Brandish the Gun!!

If He even fires in the air during an argument or a scuffle, then He will be arrested.

His weapon will be confiscated and license revoked. The police will use his weapon in the armory. There is a due procedure however for this.

Same holds for Pakistan. Forget Human beings, even if they use the Nukes on birds or animals the least, they will be prosecuted by the UN and the International community!!

If used against India, India will also retaliate.

But, Pak will be tried in Hague as wartime criminal…all their decision makers, top Brass of Army, ISI and the PM, other ministers who are part of the Nuclear committee etc etc.

Imran or anyone for that matter does not have the guts for any misadventure against India!!

THE MOST AND BIGGEST SO CALLED NUCLEAR ATTACK HE EVER THOUGHT OF IMRAN KHAN AND EXECUTED BY HIM WAS OF, THE BALL TAMPERING WITH CORK, AND OTHER SHARP OBJECTS TO GET A REVERSE SWING THROUGH THE AIR TO RATTLE OPPONENTS STUMPS!!

THAT’S ALL!!

He even taught his Disciples, the likes of Wasim Akram, Waqar Younis and other fast bowlers!!

None has the guts in Pakistan to nuke India!! Period!!

Also, our anti-missile defense shield is intact. The early warning signal system is perfect.

We are a responsible nuclear power.

Pakistan’s nuclear scientist sold the idea to Iran and North Korea clandestinely for millions of dollars.

He was arrested, tried and then send behind bars, then banished. The cheat and clown Abdul Qadeer Khan.

Our Father of Nuclear Bomb was made President of India!!

Just see the difference!

Pak was trying to bleed India and issue threats of nuclear warfare!!

THE IDEA HAS GONE FOR A SIX NOW!!

The grim face of Pakistani Heads….the PM, The cabinet ministers, their Army top Brass was clearly visible!

They were terrified of this Modi regime with Mr. Doval as NSA.

They never in their wildest dreams thought of India’s pre-dawn bombing.

Their Air force was caught napping.

The Future thinking of Pak will need to focus on the non-spreading of lies.

To dismantle the terror outfits from its soil.

To engage in dialogue with their strong neighbor India.

To walk the talk

To stop shelling at the border

To dismantle all sleeper cells

THERE ARE SO MANY EXPECTATIONS FROM NEW PAK REGIME TO BE A GOOD AND NICE NEIGHBOR OF INDIA…………BUT WHO SAYS ALL DREAMS COME TRUE??

THIS COUNTRY WILL NEVER LEARN…!!

NO ARMAAN WITH THIS IMRAN!!

About the Author:

Donald D’ Silva is an Advertising Professional & Brand Strategist managing his own Digital Marketing Company in Mumbai.

He writes about Current Affairs, Political Analysis, Bollywood Happenings and a variety of Social subjects.
