Sri Lanka on high alert over Ramadan terror threat

COLOMBO • Sri Lankan security forces are maintaining a high level of alert after the Easter Sunday bombings, officials said yesterday, amid intelligence reports that Islamist militants were planning fresh attacks before the start of the Islamic holy month of Ramadan.

The head of the police ministerial security division had said in a letter to lawmakers and other officials that attacks were expected on Sunday or Monday by militants dressed in army uniform.

There were no attacks on Sunday and Monday, but security across Buddhist-majority Sri Lanka remains ramped up, with scores of suspected Islamists arrested since the April 21 attacks on hotels and churches that killed more than 250 people.

But the government lifted a ban on social media platforms such as Facebook, WhatsApp and Viber, an official source said. The ban was imposed after the attacks to prevent the spread of rumours.

"Security will stay tight for several days because military and police are still tracking down suspects," a senior police intelligence official said yesterday.

Another government source told Reuters a document has been circulated among key security establishments instructing all police and security forces across the Indian Ocean island nation to remain on high alert because the militants were expected to try a strike before Ramadan, which is scheduled to begin on May 6 in Sri Lanka.

The government has also banned women from wearing face veils under an emergency law put in place after the Easter attacks.

Meanwhile, the Sri Lankan authorities have identified 42 foreign nationals among the 253 people killed in the string of bombings, officials said yesterday.

Another 12 foreigners remain unaccounted for and could be among unidentified bodies at Colombo's police morgue, officials said. Five foreigners were still in hospital.

A Foreign Ministry statement said the highest number of victims were from India (11), followed by Britain (six), China (four) and Denmark (three). Saudi Arabia, Spain and Turkey lost two nationals each. Bangladesh, Japan, Holland, Portugal, Switzerland and the United States all lost one national each.
