Bijli, paani, gandagi: Voters across India boycott polls on civic issues

In Pangi, Himachal Pradesh, where snow hampers road connectivity in winter, locals asked for a tunnel at a protest on May 1, 2019. They said they would not vote in the general election if their demands were not met. (Photo: ANI)

Voters in a number of states have boycotted the ongoing Lok Sabha election or have threatened to, pointing to reasons that include bad roads, a lack of water or electricity, and pollution.

Boycotts were reported in Rajasthan on May 6, the fifth polling day of the staggered, seven-part election. No votes were cast in booth 254 in Shyonathpura village (Suratgarh), IANS reported early in the afternoon; the newswire quoted an election officer who said villagers boycotted voting because of poor road quality. It quoted a second official who said villagers in Bhaisana (Dholpur district) didn't vote because of a lack of drinking water.

But IANS said in a later report that while there had been boycotts in four places in Rajasthan due to demands concerning development, people were later persuaded to vote.

[READ: Election officials have been quite creative in their efforts to encourage citizens to vote in the Lok Sabha election. Read more here.]

Boycotts have been reported in several states in previous phases. For example, many villagers in Uttarakhand did not vote on April 11, and complained of government apathy towards development in their areas. In two places in Bageshwar district, people refused to vote until their villages got a road and school -- although not everyone abstained. On the same polling day, hundreds of people in an Odisha village, Bhejipadar, boycotted voting in protest of the local government's failure to give them quality roads.

"Our village is 3 km far from the town. There are two roadways. Through one road we have to cover 10 km; for another route we have to cover 3 km. The longer route is like a forest. The shorter route is also not accessible." - Bhejipadar local to ANI

In two Madhya Pradesh villages, Garauli (Chhatarpur) and Samdai (Damoh), villagers recently said they would not vote due to water scarcity and what they said was an inadequate response to it. Similar story in Purulia, West Bengal, but the complaint was different here: ANI reported that the Sabar tribe in Bandwan called for a boycott because of a lack of electricity. In Himachal Pradesh's Pangi (Chamba), where snow hampers road connectivity in winter, locals said they would not vote if they didn't get a tunnel.

Purulia: Ppl of Sabar tribe in Bandwan area call for boycott of #LokSabhaElections2019 due to unavailability of electricity in their houses.A villager says, "electricity dept said we would get free electricity but later asked for Rs 4000, how would we pay that amount".#WestBengal pic.twitter.com/FidPk2iliE ANI (@ANI) May 6, 2019

In Tamil Nadu, which went to the polls on April 18, people in Nagaraja Kandigai village (Tiruvallur) pointed to a different problem: pollution from a sponge iron factory. Hundreds protested with a boycott.

Of course, inadequate living standards aren't the only reason cited by disaffected voters. For example, the Press Trust of India reported on April 18 that in Uttar Pradesh, people in Gujjupura (Bijnor) didn't vote in the initial hours of polling; they were unhappy their village didn't have a polling booth. But voting began after the district administration intervened.

The Lok Sabha election has reached its home stretch; only two phases remain before votes are counted on May 23. The first of these is on May 12, and the second, on May 19.

To learn more, check out our comprehensive guide. Scroll down to track your MP's performance.

Inputs from agencies
