UGC warns students from seeking admissions into PoK institutions

The University Grants Commission (UGC) has warned the students from seeking admission in unapproved institutions from Pakistan Occupied Kashmir (PoK).

Secretary of UGC, Rajnish Jain in an advisory mentioned that Pakistan Occupied Jammu and Kashmir is an integral part of the country and universities, technical colleges, medical colleges situated in Pakistan occupied Jammu and Kashmir are not established by the Indian government and neither is recognized by the authorities like UGS, AICTE and the Medical Council of India.

Students are therefore advised to maintain caution and advised not to take admissions to such institutions in the Pok. The territory under question includes Azad Jammu and Kashmir (AJK) and Gilit Baltistan which is presently not recognized in India.

On the other hand, a private school association in Kashmir has expressed their concern over the statement issued by the UGC saying that education should not be politicized and that the students should not be controlled as to where they wish to take admission. The Association even went on to say that such a direction negates the basic principles of SAARC cooperation, wherein both India and Pakistan are signatories.

G N Var chairman Private Schools Association Jammu and Kashmir (PSAJK) stated that India is part of SAARC group and that all the educational institutes in all the participating countries should be treated equally. They also added that educational institutions cannot be chosen with respect to regions. They also mentioned that if today the UGC is banning educational institute in PoK there are chanced that they may ban educational institutes in other countries as well.

He also went on to state that apart from affecting the educations o hundreds of students this decision will also have a serious effect in the longer run.

Pakistan occupied Kashmir is a part of the state of Jammu and Kashmir which was invaded by Pakistan in 1947. The place is divided into two parts which include Azad Jammu and Kashmir and Gilit-Baltistan.
