'What’s the worst job you’ve ever had?',
 'What was the last TV show you binge-watched?',
 'What’s the worst career decision you’ve ever made?',
 'What would you name your boat if you had one? ',
 'Would you say you’re more of an extrovert or an introvert?',
 'What’s the career highlight you’re most proud of?',
 'What’s your favorite way to spend a day off?',
 'What annoys you most?',
 'Algorithm: Word used by programmers when they don’t want to explain what they did.',
 'Before software can be reusable it first has to be usable.',
 'Do you have any pet peeves',
 'Does your job make you feel happy and fulfilled? Why or why not?',
 'Have you ever had a side hustle or considered having one?',
 "What's one thing that can instantly make your day better?",
 'Programming is like sex: One mistake and you have to support it for the rest of your life.',
 'There is no Ctrl-Z in life.',
 'Where’s the next place on your travel bucket list and why?',
 'Optimism is an occupational hazard of programming: feedback is the treatment. ',
 'Sometimes it pays to stay in bed on Monday, rather than spending the rest of the week debugging Monday’s code.',
 'No code has zero defects.',
 'Perfection is achieved not when there is nothing more to add, but rather when there is nothing more to take away.',
 'Remember that there is no code faster than no code.',
 'What’s your favorite part of the workday?',
 'Software and cathedrals are much the same — first we build them, then we pray.',
 'Debugging is twice as hard as writing the code in the first place. Therefore, if you write the code as cleverly as possible, you are, by definition, not smart enough to debug it.',
 'Knowledge is power.',
 'Make it work, make it right, make it fast.',
 'Programming today is a race between software engineers striving to build bigger and better idiot-proof programs, and the Universe trying to produce bigger and better idiots. So far, the Universe is winning.',
 'What’s your favorite quote from a TV show/movie/book?',
 'How old were you when you had your first celebrity crush, and who was it?',
 'It works on my machine.',
 'What do you remember most about your first job?',
 'Java is to JavaScript what car is to Carpet.',
 "What's your favorite ice cream topping?",
 'What’s your favorite thing about your current job?',
 'One man’s crappy software is another man’s full-time job.',
 '99 little bugs in the code. 99 little bugs in the code. Take one down, patch it around. 127 little bugs in the code …',
 'How old were you when you started working?',
 'Do you like going to the movies or prefer watching at home?',
 ' In order to be irreplaceable, one must always be different',
 'Whitespace is never white.',
 "What's the closest thing to real magic? ",
 'Who is the messiest person you know? ',
 'In the summer, would you rather go to the beach or go camping?',
 'What type of role do you want to take on after this one?',
 'Copy-and-Paste was programmed by programmers for programmers actually.',
 'Don’t worry if it doesn’t work right. If everything did, you’d be out of a job.',
 'How would your 10-year-old self react to what you do now?',
 'Was the last thing you read?',
 'Simplicity is the soul of efficiency.',
 'It’s not a bug — it’s an undocumented feature.',
 'Programmer: A machine that turns coffee into code.',
 'What originally got you interested in your current field of work?',
 "Where is the worst smelling place you've been?",
 'Are you into podcasts or do you only listen to music?',
 ' Code is like humor. When you have to explain it, it’s bad.',
 'Are you more of a work to live or a live to work type of person?',
 'First, solve the problem. Then, write the code.',
 'What’s your go-to guilty pleasure?',
 'Do you have a favorite holiday? Why or why not?',
 'What’s your favorite sleeping position?',
 'A son asked his father (a programmer) why the sun rises in the east, and sets in the west. His response? It works, don’t touch!',
 'Always code as if the person who ends up maintaining your code will be a violent psychopath who knows where you live.',
 'What’s the best career decision you’ve ever made?',
 'When to use iterative development? You should use iterative development only on projects that you want to succeed.',
 'Deleted code is debugged code.',
 'What was your favorite age growing up?',
 'What would be on the gag reel of your life? ',
 "What's the most useless talent you have? ",
 'How many programmers does it take to change a light bulb? None, that’s a hardware problem.',
 'There are two ways to write error-free programs; only the third works.',
 'What type of music are you into?',
 'Programming can be fun, and so can cryptography; however, they should not be combined.',
 'What will finally break the internet? ',
 'Ruby is rubbish! PHP is phpantastic!',
 'Experience is the name everyone gives to their mistakes.',
 'Do you consider yourself good at networking?',
 'If you could only eat one food for the rest of your life, what would it be?',
 'Do you think you’ll stay in your current gig awhile? Why or why not?',
 'What Secret Do You Have That No One Else Knows Except Your Sibling/S?What Did You Think Was Cool Then, When You Were Young But Isn’t Cool Now?When Was The Last Time You Did Something And Regret Doing It?What Guilty Pleasure Makes You Feel Alive?Any fool can write code that a computer can understand. Good programmers write code that humans can understand.',
 'Computers are fast; programmers keep it slow.',
 'Fix the cause, not the symptom.',
 'What are your hobbies, and how did you get into them?',
 'If debugging is the process of removing bugs, then programming must be the process of putting them in.',
 'A good programmer is someone who always looks both ways before crossing a one-way street.',
 'When I wrote this code, only God and I understood what I did. Now only God knows.',
 'It compiles; ship it.',
 'What was the best vacation you ever took and why?'