Amid protests, Dera chief Gurmeet Ram Rahim withdraws his parole plea

Amid protests against his release from jail, Dera Sacha Sauda Chief Gurmeet Ram Rahim has withdrawn his parole request. A senior government official told The Indian Express that the Dera chief has submitted a request to jail authorities from where the request has been sent to the Sirsa administration.

The Dera chief is currently lodged at Rohtak’s Sunaria jail. After he submitted a parole request for “agriculture works”, the jail authorities had recently forwarded his application to the Sirsa District Magistrate Ashok Garg. The District Magistrate had sought reports from the SP, Sub Divisional Magistarate (SDM) and other departments before sending his recommendations to Hisar Divisional Commissioner. The Divisional Commissioner would have taken a final call on his parole.

But his case for parole was believed to be “weak” after the revenue officers did no find any piece of land, out of 260 acres of the Dera land, in the name of Gurmeet Ram Rahim. Not only this, there were protests against his release on parole. On Monday, a group of residents staged a protest in Sirsa before submitting a memorandum to the district administration. Activists of social bodies and prominent persons from villages were among those who signed the memorandum against parole to the Dera chief. In the memorandum, they said that if he was released on the parole, then there would be danger to the peace, not only in Haryana but even in neighbouring states. The protesters also expressed fear of the Dera chief jumping parole.

The administration also face the threat of its decision being challenged in the High Court in case parole to the Dera head was granted.

Anshul Chattarpati, son of journalist Ramchander Chattarpati who was murdered on the behest of the Dera chief, had already announced his decision to approach the High Court if the Dera chief was released on parole. Activist Yogendra Yadav’s Swaraj India Party had also made a similar announcement.

Explained: Ram Rahim applies for parole; what this means

When Ram Rahim had earlier approached the High Court for suspension of his sentence for a period of four weeks to allow him to make arrangements for the marriage of his foster daughter Guransh Insan, the CBI had opposed the plea. The premier investigating agency, which had probed cases against him, had argued that in case Ram Rahim given the bail and allowed to visit the Dera headquarters in Sirsa, it will be “highly detrimental to the peace of the states of Haryana and nearby states and law and order situation may go out of hands”.

Later, when Guransh Insan approached the High Court for Dera head’s release on parole for four weeks, the court said on May 10: “He is not even legally adoptive father of petitioner (Guransh). I am of view that considering serious allegations against Baba Gurmeet Ram Rahim Singh and law and order problem, which is likely to be created, in case he is released on parole and difficulty of state in rearresting him, there is no ground to grant parole.”
