Ashok Gehlot, Ahmed Patel meet party workers protesting against Rahul Gandhi's resignation offer

Rajasthan Chief Minister Ashok Gehlot and senior Congress leader Ahmed Patel

New Delhi: Rajasthan Chief Minister Ashok Gehlot and senior Congress leader Ahmed Patel on Tuesday evening met party workers protesting against Rahul Gandhi's offer to step down from the post of party president. According to reports, at least a hundred party workers are staging a dharna in a show of solidarity with the party president.

Earlier in the day, senior party leaders including Rajesh Lilothia, Shobha Oza and Jagdish Tytler from Delhi were present at the spot. "We demand that Rahulji should continue as party chief," leaders told a news agency while asserting that the responsibility for the Lok Sabha drubbing is with all the party leaders and not just Rahul Gandhi.

The protest comes a day after Rahul met all the party chief ministers - Rajasthan CM Ashok Gehlot, Punjab CM Amarinder Singh, Madhya Pradesh CM Kamal Nath, Puducherry CM V Narayansamy and Chhattisgarh CM Bhupesh Baghel.

Speaking after the meeting, Gehlot had suggested that all the CMs urged Rahul to continue as party president and restructure the party from the ground level. "We conveyed to him the feelings of our party workers and leaders. We hope that he will pay heed to our views and do the right thing," Gehlot had said.

However, so far Rahul seems firm on his decision to quit as Congress president. Earlier today, a party worker climbed a tree in a bid to commit suicide. Reports said that Congress worker Hanif Khan threatened to commit suicide by hanging from a tree if Gandhi did not take back his decision to resign as party chief.

Gandhi offered to step down as party chief on May 25 at the Congress Working Committee meeting, taking full responsibility for the party's poor show in Lok Sabha elections. The CWC, the highest decision-making body of the Congress, has, however, rejected his resignation and authorised him to revamp and restructure the party at all levels.

In this regard, more than a 100 party post holders have resigned. The resignation spree was triggered after Rahul said that he was surprised that no one else has come forward to take responsibility for the party's drubbing.
