Upset with bank notices, debt-ridden commits suicide in Rajasthan

The incident came to light after the villagers found Nath lying on a cot (Representative Image). | Photo Credit: ANI

Key Highlights Netram Nath committed suicide on July 3 Nath's family alleged that he committed suicide as he was unable to repay a loan Locals staged protests with Nath's body and demanded compensation for farmers

Jaipur: A farmer allegedly committed suicide in Rajasthan on July 3. The family of the deceased claimed that he was struggling to repay a loan he had taken and was stressed about the same. Netram Nath consumed pesticides in his farm in Rajasthan's Raghunathpura village.

The incident came to light after the villagers found Nath lying on a cot. The villagers informed Nath's family who rushed him to a hospital where he was declared brought dead.

Nath's family staged protests in the area and demanded compensation. One of the protesters told ANI, "We are protesting against the Rajasthan government in Sri Ganganagar with Netram's dead body. The state government should immediately waive off farmers loan and they should provide all the farmers with Rs 20 lakh as compensation amount."

Rajasthan: Brother of a farmer who allegedly committed suicide by consuming pesticides in Raghunathpura of Sri Ganganagar yesterday says,"he used to receive frequent notice from Marudhara Gramin Bank branch in Vijaynagar. He was unable to repay loan & was very stressed about it." pic.twitter.com/vIZ08RsspX — ANI (@ANI) July 4, 2019

The protester added, "If Ashok Gehlot-led BJP government does not do anything in this regard, we will be taking Netram's body to Rajasthan Vidhan Sabha and will stage a protest over there, on Friday."

Also Read: Telangana: Farmer dies of heatstroke while waiting for his turn to sell paddy

The deceased farmer's brother said, "My brother used to receive frequent notices from Marudhara Gramin Bank branch in Vijaynagar. He was unable to repay the loan and was very stressed about it."

Contrary to the claims made by the deceased's family, Marudhara Gramin Bank manager Jagroop Singh said that his bank did not send any notice to the deceased. Singh said, "We had not sent any bank notice to Netram for the past few months; he is our regular customer, why would we bother our regular customers by sending a notice? His account currently holds Rs 3 lakh approximately."

Unable to repay loans, farmer commits suicide in Rajasthan's Baran

A farmer committed suicide in Rajasthan's Baran on July 2. Hajari Lal Gurjar had taken a loan of Rs 90,000 and was allegedly distressed as he was unable to repay it. The incident took place under the limits of Mangrol police station. The farmer's family claimed that he had been facing mental stress because of the loan.

District Collector Indra Singh Rao said, "A case of death under suspicious circumstances has been registered by the police in the matter and is being investigated. The deceased farmer had dues of Rs 90,000 to be repaid to a bank. The deceased was in duress because of his occupation and his death could also be seen as a result of his declining health."
