Rajya Sabha MP Vaiko opposes use of Hindi in Parliament: A look at some past controversies over the language

Rajya Sabha MP and MDMK chief Vaiko | Photo Credit: Times Now

Key Highlights Tamil Nadu saw violent protests in 1965 over a proposal to make Hindi India's official language Hindi language has on several occasions become a topic of debate and argument in southern states Prime Minister Narendra Modi is Hindi fanatic, said Rajya Sabha MP Vaiko

Chennai: The controversy surrounding Hindi was reignited by Rajya Sabha MP and Marumalarchi Dravida Munnetra Kazhagam (MDMK) chief Vaiko on Monday after he raised objection over the use of the language in Parliament.

Speaking to Times Now, he said, “Let them speak (Hindi) in Bihar and Uttar Pradesh. Why (do) they have to speak in Hindi in Parliament? From Jawaharlal Nehru to Manmohan Singh, including Atal Bihari Vajpayee (PMs) used to deliver their addresses only in English. Only Prime Minister Narendra Modi is a Hindi fanatic... English should be used in Parliament.”

He further said that the standard of debates has come down because of insistence upon the usage of Hindi as the language of communication in Parliament, adding that it is being used to draw a wedge between the people of India.

RELATED NEWS No end to language politics? DMK MP Kanimozhi accuses AIADMK govt of imposing Hindi on Tamil Nadu

DMK supports Vaiko over language war

The Dravida Munnetra Kazhagam (DMK) backed the parliamentarian’s remark and said that imposing Hindi would be similar to throwing stones at a beehive.

Another DMK leader said that MPs who do not speak in Hindi feel alienated. “Hindi has not been announced as a national language so far... English should be used in the Parliament so that the leaders from non-Hindi speaking states could understand what is going on. I concur with the statement of Vaiko. It (Hindi) alienates the members who speak other languages,” a DMK leader told Times Now.

A look at the past controversies over the Hindi language

The Hindi language has, on several occasions, become a topic of debate and argument in southern states, especially in Tamil Nadu. The recent controversy over the language erupted after Prime Minister Modi government released a draft of new education policy. A row triggered over one of the clauses of the National Education Policy, which proposed that Hindi should be made a mandatory third language in all schools across the country.

On May 31, the Ministry of Human Resource Development (HRD) released the draft of the National Education Policy (NEP) suggesting Hindi be made a mandatory third language in non-Hindi speaking states.

The draft policy drew flak from several quarters, with many political leaders from southern states saying that it would divide the country. However, after the uproar, the Central Government released a revised draft, withdrawing the clause on Hindi language imposition.

In another controversy over the language, DMK’s Thoothukkudi MP Kanimozhi earlier this month tweeted an image of a local bus which had ‘emergency exit’ and ‘fire extinguisher’ written in Hindi, alleging that the move was an attempt to reduce the importance of Tamil and impose Hindi.

She also raised the matter in Lok Sabha and said, “This government has taken up that every programme will be only named in Hindi. I would like to ask you how will a villager in my district understand what it is? I've seen signboards in Thoothukudi saying PM Sadak Yojana, with no translation. I don't understand it.”

Tamil Nadu's tryst with anti-Hindi agitation:

Tamil Nadu has often considered itself a bulwark against what it sees as the Centre's ploy to impose Hindi upon the Dravidian belt comprising Tamil Nadu, Andhra Pradesh, Telangana, Karnataka, and Kerala.

In 1937, the Tamils, led by leaders Periyar EV Ramasamy and CN Annadurai had taken up cudgels against the newly elected Congress government headed by Rajaji. The latter had issued orders - then called the Government Order (GO) - that made it incumbent upon all to make Hindi compulsory in state government schools.

There were rallies with angry speeches by the leaders, soon the protest spread like fire across the state and led to 1,100 people's arrests. Unfortunately, two men among the thousands arrested (Natarajan and Thalamuthu) died during incarceration due to some underlying illness, stoking the agitation further.

The British Raj era did not want to fan this first real anti-Hindi agitation. That is why when in February 1940 when Governor Erskine's government took over after the Congress resigned in 1939 - protesting the dragging of India in WWII - it withdrew the order of deploying compulsory Hindi in schools; thus ending an almost 3-year-long agitation.

In 1963, CN Annadurai, the only DMK MP in Rajya Sabha stood steadfast against the Official Languages Act of 1963 and Article 344 of the Indian Constitution. The Jawaharlal Nehru government refused to pull down Hindi as the official language in Parliament but however agreed to continue with English as the parallel official language along with Hindi.

However, Nehru's death in 1964 created a fear in the Tamil leader's mind. On January 26, 1965 - the day the Official Languages Act came into force was declared by Annadurai as a day of mourning. In 1965, violent protests had erupted in the southern state over the proposal to make Hindi India’s sole official language. According to official estimates, at least 70 people, including two policemen were also killed in the clashes.

The draft National Education Policy 2019 proposes a three-language formula for all states of the Indian Union. It says schools in Hindi speaking areas should also offer and teach Indian languages from other parts of India.

That too has been met with a storm in Tamil Nadu. Makkal Needhi Maiam founder Kamal Haasan, speaking on the Centre's proposal on the three-language system in schools, told ANI: "I have acted in many Hindi films, in my opinion, the Hindi language should not be imposed on anyone."


