TISS Hyderabad to resume classes from July 25, days after students' protest

TISS Hyderabad to resume classes from July 25, days after students' protest

"It is sincerely appealed to all students to ensure the smooth functioning and conduct of classes and all other academic activities on campus," a notice states.

news Controversy

Days after it decided to suspend all academic activities on its Hyderabad Campus 'sine-die', the Tata Institute of Social Sciences (TISS) said that it would re-open and classes would be conducted from July 25.

In a notice, Acting Registrar M P Balamurugan said, "Since the declaration of suspension of academic activities, the institute administration has received a large number of representations from present students, alumni, parents and other well wishers, appealing for resuming of activities in its Hyderabad Off-Campus at the earliest."

"In response to these representations and given the Institute's committment to smooth conduct of academic activities and based on current assessment of the situation in the Hyderabad Off-Campus with the hope that no obstructions would be caused, the institute has decided to re-open and resume academic activities in its Hyderabad campus from July 25, 2019. It is sincerely appealed to all students to ensure the smooth functioning and conduct of classes and all other academic activities on campus," the notice adds.

The students over the last few days, were protesting over the change in hostel and mess fee structures. With the campus being shifted to Turkayamjal from Rajendranagar at the outskirts of Hyderabad, and the new fee structure demanding all students (including SC, ST and OBC students relying on financial aid) pay the entire semester’s hostel and dining charges upfront, protesting students were demanding that the administration take responsibility for students with Government of India – Post Matric Scholarship (GoI PMS).

On July 15, with the students and administration in a deadlock, the latter decided to suspend academic operations.

In a notice dated July 15, the University said that the protesting students had "continued with the blockade in spite of our repeated appeals and efforts to negotiate, thereby completely paralysing the functioning of the campus for the past five days."

The notice was later challenged in the Hyderabad High Court as students filed a petition stating that the action of the TISS administration violated the students’ fundamental right to education.

While the institute will resume academic activities, the hearing in the High Court is expected to continue.

Read: TISS Hyd tussle reaches HC: Students’ petition against Uni suspending academics
