Srinagar-Jammu highway blocked, air traffic affected

Srinagar-Jammu highway blocked, air traffic affected

Fresh snowfall in upper reaches, rains in plain areas

SRINAGAR, Jan 21: Fresh snowfall occurred in upper reaches, while rains lashed the plain areas of Kashmir today.

The snowfall and rain blocked the 300 km long Srinagar-Jammu national highway. The flight operations at the airport here were also affected. Four flights were cancelled and 11 delayed due to poor visibility.

Intermittent rains occurred through-out the day today in Srinagar and other plain areas.

The Jammu-Srinagar highway was closed on today following fresh snowfall in the Banihal area that saw nearly two-feet deep snow accumulate on the strategic route, a traffic department official said.

No vehicular movement was allowed on the highway during the day keeping the safety of travellers in mind. The situation will be reviewed after the weather improves," he said.

Intending travellers have been advised not to undertake journey without finding out the latest status of the road from traffic helplines in Jammu and Srinagar.

Bad weather conditions disrupted operations at the Srinagar international airport here, leading to the cancellation of four flights, officials said.

Due to the inclement weather, four of the 27 flights to and fro the Srinagar airport were cancelled, an official of the airport authority of India said.

Another 11 flights got delayed due to poor visibility and intermittent rainfall since this morning.

The MET has forecast moderate to heavy snowfall in the Kashmir Valley and rain in the Jammu division during the next 24 hours till tomorrow

"Widespread moderate to rather heavy rain and snowfall is likely to occur during the next 24 hours(till Tuesday)," a Met Department official said.

"A western disturbance is active over the state. Its intensity will decrease from Wednesday onwards".

A western disturbance is the name given to an extra-tropical storm in the Mediterranean Sea under whose influence rain and snowfall occurs in India, Pakistan, Bangladesh and Nepal.

Srinagar recorded minus 0.3 degrees Celsius while it was 0.2 in Pahalgam and minus 4 in Gulmarg.

Leh town recorded minus 5.6 while Kargil was the coldest at minus 14 degrees Celsius.

Jammu city was 11.9, Katra 10, Batote 2.1, Banihal 1.1 and Bhaderwah 1.9 degrees Celsius.
