Violent anti-CAA stir in Lucknow leaves one protester dead, cop injured

A protester has died after being injured in violence during protests against the amended Citizenship Act in Lucknow, sources have said. One policeman has also been injured in the incident.

Sources say that the man, identified as Mohammed Vakil, was hit by a gunshot during the protest. The bullet had hit him in the stomach.

The police have however said that the man did not die of a police bullet. UP DGP OP Singh said, "No death in police firing, police will investigate the reason. we are looking at the CCTV footages."

"Four injured people have been admitted to the trauma centre. Out of these two were said to be hit by some sort of splinters. Mohammed Vakil has died from his injuries, but the source of the splinters that hit him is yet to be ascertained," the UP top cop said.

The protests against the CAA had taken a violent turn in Uttar Pradesh as protesters pelted stones at police in Lucknow and set vehicles ablaze in Samabhal

Police fire teargas shells to control the situation in Lucknow's Madeyganj area. About 20 people were taken into custody.

A public bus was set ablaze and another damaged in Sambhal. Some protesters pelted stones at a police station. Internet services were suspended to control the protesters.

Uttar Pradesh Chief Minister Yogi Adityanath said his government will take "revenge" on those involved in the violence over the amended Citizenship Act by auctioning their property to compensate for the losses.

"There is no place for violence in a democracy. In the name of opposing the CAA, the Congress, SP and Left parties have pushed the entire country to fire.

"There was violence in Lucknow and Sambhal and we will deal with it strictly. All properties of those involved in damaging public assets will be seized and auctioned to

compensate for the losses," he said.

"They have been captured in video and CCTV footage. We will take 'badla' (revenge) on them," he said.

Read | This is undeclared emergency, not BJP rule: Congress's Abhishek Singhvi

Read | Anti-CAA rally in Kolkata: BJP buying skull caps to disturb peace, says Mamata Banerjee

Watch | Watch: Stones pelted, tear gas fired as CAA protests turn violent in Lucknow
