Some parties trying to incite people to indulge in violent protests against Citizenship Amendment Act: MoS Reddy

NEW DELHI: Union minister of state for home G Kishan Reddy on Thursday said some political parties were trying to incite people, particularly students, to indulge in violent protests against the Citizenship Amendment Act (CAA) and proposed all-India NRC , by spreading misinformation on both the issues."Rumours and misinformation are being spread on CAA by some political parties for own narrow political ends. CAA is not targeted at any Indian citizen from any religion, region or community. It is only meant to facilitate persecuted foreigners belonging to six minority faiths in Pakistan, Afghanistan and Bangladesh. An attempt is being made to misinterpret CAA along religious lines to mobilise students, women and children for violent protests. This is highly irresponsible on part of political parties, who seem to have abdicated their duty to help maintain calm in the country," stated Reddy."People, including students, have every right to protest peacefully. However, violence and arson cannot be condoned. I request students, intellectuals and celebrities slamming CAA to first read the law carefully. It does not affect Indian citizens from any religious community in any way. If anybody still has doubts on CAA, the home ministry is willing to engage and clarify," he added.On the proposed national NRC, Reddy underlined that a formal announcement in this regard was yet to be made, and it would be some time before the relevant rules are notified. "Our priority right now is to restore calm," he said.Reddy's remarks came even as a review meeting was held in the home ministry on Thursday evening to assess the situation across the country in the wake of anti-CAA protests The MoS said that while nobody who has indulged in violence or arson during anti-CAA protests would be spared, "our priority now is to restore calm and public order by reaching out to the people to bust myths and canards being spread by some political parties and outfits about CAA provisions".The minister appealed to students, intellectuals and celebrities not to fall prey to misinformation being circulated on social media by some political parties and vested interests, while cautioning the political parties against "adding fuel to the fire by giving a religious colour to CAA".Reddy hoped the various state police, with whom the Centre has been in constant touch, would be able to rein in the anti-social elements instigating the violent protests. "The situation has become peaceful in the northeast. While protests were held today, including in Delhi, violence was reported only from Lucknow. We are hopeful that the protests will die down in the next 2-3 days," he said.
