Citizenship Act Protest Highlights: 6 Dead In Violence Across UP, Protesters Clash With Police In Old Delhi

Protest in Delhi, UP and Karnataka against the Citizenship Amendment Act.

At least six people have died in violence across Uttar Pradesh as thousands took to the streets protesting against the Citizenship Amendment Act. Internet services continue to be blocked in several parts of the country and Section 144 -- a law that bans gatherings of four or more people, effectively making protests illegal -- was imposed in cities across the UP and Karnataka.

Congress President Sonia Gandhi, in a statement on Friday evening, called the new citizenship law "discriminatory" and accused the BJP-led central government using "brute force to suppress dissent". She assured the people that her party "is fully committed to stand up and defend their fundamental rights and uphold the foundational values of our constitution."

Protesters in Old Delhi carrying Indian flags and "Save the Constitution" banners and marching from Jama Masjid to Jantar Mantar in the centre of the city were stopped at Delhi Gate. Delhi Police put up barricades to block the protesters but as the crowd grew larger, and a vehicle was set on fire outside a police station, police resorted to using water cannons and baton-charges to control the situation.

Earlier in the day, Bhim Army chief Chandrashekhar Azad led a massive protest against the controversial law at Jama Masjid and called for a protest march to Jantar Mantar. At least 11 protestors were injured and taken to a government hospital nearby.

Delhi Metro has shut 17 station in response to the violence, including the busy Rajiv Chowk, Pragati Maidan and Khan Market stations.

The Citizenship (Amendment) Act for the first time makes religion the test of citizenship in India. The government says it will help minorities from three Muslim-dominated countries to get citizenship if they fled to India because of religious persecution. Critics say it is designed to discriminate against Muslims and violates the secular principles of the constitution.

Here are the Highlights on developments on Citizenship Amendment Act:

Dec 20, 2019 20:19 (IST) Citizenship Act Protests: Priyanka Gandhi Says Citizenship Law Is Against Poor

"The Citizenship Amendment Act and NRC are against the poor. If someone has to dig up old documents, if your grandmother has show, will they be able to? What are they (BJP government) putting the country through. They want the country to stand in line like during demonetisation" "The Citizenship Amendment Act and NRC are against the poor. If someone has to dig up old documents, if your grandmother has show, will they be able to? What are they (BJP government) putting the country through. They want the country to stand in line like during demonetisation"

Dec 20, 2019 20:05 (IST) Citizenship Act Protests: Priyanka Gandhi Arrives At India Gate

Congress leader Priyanka Gandhi arrived at India Gate on Friday evening to thousands of people protesting against the Citizenship Amendment Act.



Dec 20, 2019 20:02 (IST) Delhi Protests: One Car Was Set On Fire, Several Others Were Damaged



Dec 20, 2019 19:59 (IST) Delhi Protests: Road Leading To Jama Masjid Was Littered With Footwear

The road leading to Jama Masjid was littered with footwear and stones as police chased away the protesters from the area.

The road leading to Jama Masjid was littered with footwear and stones as police chased away the protesters from the area.

Dec 20, 2019 19:50 (IST) CAA Protests: 11 People Injured In Delhi Gate Clashes Between Protesters And Police

At least 11 people have been injured in clashes between the police and protesters at Delhi Gate, all of whom have been taken to a government hospital nearby. At least 11 people have been injured in clashes between the police and protesters at Delhi Gate, all of whom have been taken to a government hospital nearby.

Dec 20, 2019 19:00 (IST) Citizenship Act, NRC Will Particularly Hurt Poor And Vulnerable: Sonia Gandhi

"The Citizenship Amendment Act is discriminatory and the proposed nationwide NRC will particularly hurt the poor and vulnerable. Like at the time of notebandhi (notes ban), they will have to stand in line to prove their and their ancestor's citizenship. People's apprehensions are real and legitimate"

Dec 20, 2019 18:58 (IST) Citizenship Act Protests: Brute Repression Unleashed By BJP Government, Says Sonia Gandhi

"There have been spontaneous protests in the universities, the IITs, IIMs and other leading academic institutions throughout the country against the divisive agenda and anti-people policies of the BJP government"

Dec 20, 2019 18:41 (IST) Citizenship Act Protests: People Have Right To Raise Their Voice Against Wrong Decisions, Says Sonia Gandhi

"In a democracy people have the right to raise their voice against wrong decisions and policies of the government and register their concerns. BJP government has shown utter disregard for people's voices & chosen to use brute force to suppress dissent," Congress President Sonia Gandhi said in a statement.



Dec 20, 2019 18:32 (IST) Congress President Sonia Gandhi Speaks On Citizenship Act Protests



Dec 20, 2019 18:21 (IST) Metro Shutdown Update: 17 Metro Stations Have Been Shut In Delhi

"Entry and exit gates of Mandi House and Janpath are closed. Interchange facility is available at Mandi House," the Delhi Metro Rail Corporation or DMRC said in a tweet.



Earlier, the DMRC had closed the entry and exit gates of Rajiv Chowk, Pragati Maidan and Khan Market station. Interchange facility was available at Rajiv Chowk



Johri Enclave, Shiv Vihar and Dilshad Garden stations were also closed



"Of the 285 stations, Chawri Bazar, Lal Quila, Jama Masjid & Delhi Gate on violet line, Jaffrabad & Maujpur-Babarpur on pink line and Jamia Millia Islamia on magenta line are closed as per instructions of security agencies. Rest of the metro network is operating as per schedule," the DMRC had tweeted

Dec 20, 2019 18:19 (IST) Delhi Protest: Car Set Ablaze Near Delhi Gate, Police Use Water Cannons To Put Out Fire

Police used water cannons to disperse the large crowd protesting against the new citizenship law as well as to douse the fire started by the protesters.

Police used water cannons to disperse the large crowd protesting against the new citizenship law as well as to douse the fire started by the protesters.

Dec 20, 2019 18:14 (IST) Delhi Protest: Police Use Water Cannons Against Protesters In Old Delhi

Police tried to stop protesters marching towards India Gate with water cannons



Dec 20, 2019 17:24 (IST) Violence Over Citizenship Act In Parts Of UP, Stones Thrown, Tear Gas

Fresh protests broken out across at least seven Uttar Pradesh districts after Friday prayers this afternoon as thousands defied state-wide prohibitory orders and took to the streets to fight the new citizenship law Fresh protests broken out across at least seven Uttar Pradesh districts after Friday prayers this afternoon as thousands defied state-wide prohibitory orders and took to the streets to fight the new citizenship law

Dec 20, 2019 17:23 (IST) Jamia Protest: National Human Rights Commission Team Visits Jamia Millia Islamia Library

A team of National Human Rights Commission (NHRC) inspects the library of Jamia Millia Islamia where the police entered recently during an anti-Citizenship Amendment Act protest.



Headed by IPS Manzil Saini, the seven-member team also inquired about the police action on the protesters during the protest against the Citizenship Amendment Act on December 15, 2019. A team of National Human Rights Commission (NHRC) inspects the library of Jamia Millia Islamia where the police entered recently during an anti-Citizenship Amendment Act protest.Headed by IPS Manzil Saini, the seven-member team also inquired about the police action on the protesters during the protest against the Citizenship Amendment Act on December 15, 2019.

Dec 20, 2019 17:02 (IST) Those born before 1987 or whose parents born before 1987 are Indians, says Government: Report

Anyone born in India before 1987 or whose parents were born before 1987 are bona fide Indian citizens according to law and need not worry due to the Citizenship Amendment Act, 2019 (CAA) or a possible nationwide NRC, a top government official was quoted as saying news agency PTI.

Dec 20, 2019 16:55 (IST) CAA Protest: BJP Will Have To Go If It Doesn't Take Back Citizenship Amended Act, Says Mamata Banerjee

Bengal Chief Minister Mamata Banerjee said the BJP will have to go if it doesn't take back Citizenship Amended Act and drop plans to implement nation-wide NRC.

Dec 20, 2019 16:52 (IST) Citizenship Amendment Act Won't Affect Goans With Portuguese Passports, Says Goa Chief Minister

"Goans who are in Portugal or those holding Portuguese passports would not be affected by the CAA," said Chief Minister Pramod Sawant adding that some elements were trying to misguide people claiming that the Portuguese passport holders will be in trouble because of the new citizenship law

Dec 20, 2019 16:45 (IST) Entry, Exit Gates Of 10 Delhi Metro Stations Closed

"Of the 285 stations, Chawri Bazar, Lal Quila, Jama Masjid & Delhi Gate on violet line, Jaffrabad & Maujpur-Babarpur on pink line and Jamia Millia Islamia on magenta line are closed as per instructions of security agencies. Rest of the metro network is operating as per schedule," the DMRC tweeted. "Of the 285 stations, Chawri Bazar, Lal Quila, Jama Masjid & Delhi Gate on violet line, Jaffrabad & Maujpur-Babarpur on pink line and Jamia Millia Islamia on magenta line are closed as per instructions of security agencies. Rest of the metro network is operating as per schedule," the DMRC tweeted.

Dec 20, 2019 16:42 (IST) CAA Protest: Internet Services Suspended In UP's Bulandshahr

Internet services were suspended in Uttar Pradesh's Bulandshahr district from 3 pm on Friday, as thousands defied state-wide prohibitory orders and took to the streets to protests against the new citizenship law Internet services were suspended in Uttar Pradesh's Bulandshahr district from 3 pm on Friday, as thousands defied state-wide prohibitory orders and took to the streets to protests against the new citizenship law

Dec 20, 2019 16:31 (IST) BJP Government Making "Karnataka As Another Kashmir," Says Former Chief Minister Siddaramaiah

State govt led by @BSYBJP is trying to make Karnataka as another Kashmir. All the rights enshrined in the Constitution is curtailed.



Our party leaders, who had gone to see the situation, have been detained in Mangaluru airport. I condemn this act to silence us.#RevokeSec144 - Siddaramaiah (@siddaramaiah) December 20, 2019

Dec 20, 2019 16:28 (IST) Rapid Action Force stand guard during a protest against the Citizenship Amendment Act, organised by District United Jama-ath and Confederation of Islamic in Tamil Nadu's Coimbatore.

Rapid Action Force stand guard during a protest against the Citizenship Amendment Act, organised by District United Jama-ath and Confederation of Islamic in Tamil Nadu's Coimbatore.

Dec 20, 2019 16:18 (IST) Nitish Kumar's Big Hint That Another BJP Ally Differs: What NRC

Nitish Kumar today indicated that he will not implement the National Register for Citizens (NRC) in Bihar, adding to the troubles of ally BJP as it faces massive nationwide protests against the citizenship law and NRC. "Kahe ka NRC (What NRC)?" - the response to a journalist's question finally revealed the Bihar Chief Minister's view on the subject Nitish Kumar today indicated that he will not implement the National Register for Citizens (NRC) in Bihar, adding to the troubles of ally BJP as it faces massive nationwide protests against the citizenship law and NRC. "NRC (What NRC)?" - the response to a journalist's question finally revealed the Bihar Chief Minister's view on the subject

Dec 20, 2019 16:17 (IST) Mamata Banerjee Backtracks On Referendum Remark, Says Meant Opinion Poll

West Bengal Chief Minister Mamata Banerjee appears to have rolled back on her statement seeking a United Nations-monitored referendum on the government's new citizenship law, a hugely controversial issue that has led to protests across the country West Bengal Chief Minister Mamata Banerjee appears to have rolled back on her statement seeking a United Nations-monitored referendum on the government's new citizenship law, a hugely controversial issue that has led to protests across the country

Dec 20, 2019 16:09 (IST) Citizenship Act Protests: Pinarayi Vijayan Slams "Fascist Mindset" Behind Detention Of Journalists In Mangaluru

Kerala Chief Minister, in a statement, said his government will make all efforts to ensure the safety of journalists from Kerala travelling to Mangaluru to cover the protests against the new citizenship law.

"I strongly condemn the attempt to portray journalists as troublemakers and their news gathering equipment as weapons. Onslaught on media freedom is a fascist mindset. There must be strong public sentiment against this," Mr Vijayan said in a statement.



Dec 20, 2019 16:05 (IST) Kerala Chief Minister Writes To BS Yediyurapppa Over Detention Of Journalists In Mangaluru

Karnataka Police detained some Kerala-based journalists early on Friday in front of a government hospital in Mangaluru where the post-mortem of the two people who died during protests was underway.

Karnataka Police detained some Kerala-based journalists early on Friday in front of a government hospital in Mangaluru where the post-mortem of the two people who died during protests was underway.

Dec 20, 2019 14:39 (IST) Delhi Gate Metro Station To Be Shut, Says DMRC

Security Update



Entry & exit gates of Delhi Gate are closed. Trains will not be halting at this station. - Delhi Metro Rail Corporation (@OfficialDMRC) December 20, 2019

Dec 20, 2019 14:38 (IST) "Want Opinion Poll On CAA," Says Mamata Banerjee, Day After Call For Referendum

Mamata Banerjee said: "BJP can say whatever it wants. I am proud of my country. I will not be insulted by a party born in 1980. I have full faith in my country and it's people. I want an opinion poll on CAA (Citizenship Amendment Act) and NRC (National Register of Citizens)"

On Thursday, the Bengal Chief Minister dared the ruling BJP to go for a UN-monitored referendum on the new citizenship law. Ms Banerjee had said, "If BJP has guts, it should go for a UN-monitored referendum on the amended Citizenship Act and NRC".

Dec 20, 2019 14:36 (IST) Mamata Banerjee Claries Remark Calling For UN Referendum On Citizenship Law

gana vote. I meant an opinion poll overseen by experts from the Human Rights Commission. And yes, experts from the UN also.



"BJP can say whatever it wants. I am proud of my country. I will not be insulted by a party born in 1980. I have full faith in my country and it's people. I want an opinion poll on CAA (Citizenship Amendment Act) and NRC (National Register of Citizens)"

Bengal Chief Minister Mamata Banerjee today said: ""Opinion poll is what I want. I did not say referendum. I saidvote. I meant an opinion poll overseen by experts from the Human Rights Commission. And yes, experts from the UN also."BJP can say whatever it wants. I am proud of my country. I will not be insulted by a party born in 1980. I have full faith in my country and it's people. I want an opinion poll on CAA (Citizenship Amendment Act) and NRC (National Register of Citizens)"







Dec 20, 2019 14:18 (IST) Tamil Nadu Colleges To Remain Shut Till New Year Amid CAA Protests

Three universities have been shut following anti-Citizenship Amendment Act protest by students. Colleges in Tamil Nadu will now reopen only on January 2. The state government ordered 4 extra days of holiday citing rural local body polls.

Dec 20, 2019 13:29 (IST) Bhim Army's Chandrashekhar Azad Leads Massive Protest At Delhi's Jama Masjid

Bhim Army chief Chandrashekhar Azad, holding up a copy of the constitution and a photo of BR Ambedkar, leads massive protest at Delhi's Jama Masjid amid police presence



Dec 20, 2019 13:21 (IST) Gates Of 3 Metro Stations Shut, Says DMRC

Entry and exit gates of Chawri Bazar, Lal Quila and Jama Masjid are closed. Trains will not be halting at this station, says Delhi Metro Rail Corporation in a tweet



Dec 20, 2019 12:47 (IST) Large gatherings banned in Northeast Delhi, police conducts flag march



Assembly of people in large numbers have been banned in 12 police station areas of Northeast Delhi. Police carried out a flag march in the district which witnessed violence during protests against the amended citizenship law three days ago, officials said.

The police also used drones to keep a tab on the law and order situation in the area.

Joint Commissioner of Police Alok Kumar and Deputy Commissioner of Police Ved Prakash Surya were among senior officers who were present during the flag march.

"We are conducting a flag march in the area to maintain law and order and peace," DCP Surya said.

Dec 20, 2019 11:40 (IST) Red alert in Aligarh, heavy security deployed in view of Friday prayers



A red alert was sounded and the city put under a heavy security cover in view of the first Friday prayers since the police crackdown on the students of Aligarh Muslim University protesting the Citizenship Act earlier this week.



Dec 20, 2019 10:54 (IST) Group meetings banned in 44 of 52 districts in Madhya Pradesh



Authorities have banned large gatherings in 44 districts of the 52 districts in Madhya Pradesh.

Senior state minister PC Sharma, while justifying the imposition of Section 144 of CrPc, said: "Since the Kamal Nath government launched a war against adulteration and land mafia, those involved in such acts as well as those behind such people have been trying to disturb the situation by sneaking into such protests to make them violent".

"Those trying to sneak into these protests to disturb the situation may also be from the opposition BJP, but we'll trace all those trying to make peaceful protests violent," he added.

The BJP welcomed the imposition of Section 144, but chose to ignore the Congress.

Dec 20, 2019 10:44 (IST) Many journalists questioned in Mangaluru, cops say many lack valid ID



Journalists and crew from at least three Kerala-based news channels - News 24, Media One and Asianet - have been stopped from reporting in Mangaluru, where two died yesterday in police firing amid protests against the new law".

The four news channels were reportedly in Mangaluru to interview the relatives of those who were killed during massive nationwide protests against the controversial Citizenship (Amendment) Act, or CAA, on Thursday. Journalists and crew from at least three Kerala-based news channels - News 24, Media One and Asianet - have been stopped from reporting in Mangaluru, where two died yesterday in police firing amid protests against the new law".

Dec 20, 2019 09:57 (IST) RJD calls for Bihar bandh on December 21



The Rashtriya Janata Dal has called for strike in Bihar on December 21. "We have called a bandh in Bihar on December 21 against the Citizenship Amendment Act. The act is unconstitutional and against humanity. It has exposed the divisive character of BJP," Tejashwi Yadav said.

Dec 20, 2019 09:48 (IST) Assam Chief Minister Sarbananda Sonowal: I want to assure people that no one can steal rights of the sons of the soil of Assam, there is no threat to our language or our identity. #CitizenshipAmendmentActpic.twitter.com/A01uX9jhZy - ANI (@ANI) December 20, 2019

Dec 20, 2019 09:46 (IST) Mobile internet ban lifted in Assam



The ban on mobile internet was lifted today in Assam, 10 days after authorities placed the restrictions to amid violence in the state. Mobile operators BSNL and Jio services have resumed in the state.

Dec 20, 2019 09:31 (IST) "Paranoid, Insecure Regime": Ramachandra Guha, Detained During Citizenship Act Protests





Historian Ramachandra Guha, detained during protests in Bengaluru today over the citizenship law, said the enforcement of Section 144, a British-era ban on large gatherings, is the mark of a "paranoid, fearful and insecure" regime. He called it the "fourth or fifth" crisis the republic was going through since its independence. "Shutting internet in Delhi? What signal will it send to the world? Is this a self-confident India," Ram Guha questioned, speaking to NDTV after his release around four hours later.

"The British viceroy did the same thing. Indira Gandhi did the same thing. The police thought if they pick up 15 people in Bengaluru they would be scared. There was absolutely no reason to impose Section 144 unless you are plain stupid."

The 61-year-old historian was at a protest at the Town Hall in Bengaluru speaking to the NDTV reporter when he was dragged mid-sentence by a group of policemen, detained and hauled into a bus.

Dec 20, 2019 09:01 (IST) Security Update



Entry & exit gates of Jamia Millia Islamia and Jasola Vihar Shaheen Bagh are closed. Trains will not be halting at these stations.



All other stations are open and services are normal. - Delhi Metro Rail Corporation (@OfficialDMRC) December 20, 2019

Dec 20, 2019 09:00 (IST)

Protests were held in 13 major cities around the country on the eighth day of unrest over the new law that's emerging as the biggest challenge to Prime Minister Narendra Modi's government since his election in 2014.

Dec 20, 2019 09:00 (IST) 2 killed in Mangaluru, 1 in Lucknow during protests



Three persons died and several were injured as protests swept at least 10 states against the Centre's new law on citizenship. Permission for the protest was denied in almost all states but the protesters defied the police and a lockdown across Uttar Pradesh, parts of Delhi, Karnataka and Madhya Pradesh. In Mangaluru, where curfew has been declared, two persons died in police firing and 20 policemen were injured. In Lucknow, one person died and three others were injured.
