Daryaganj Violence: Bhim Army's Chandra Shekhar Aazad sent to Tihar for 14-day judicial custody

Follow us on Image Source : PTI Chandrashekhar Azad (with Indian Constitution in hand) during anti-CAA protest at Daryaganj in Delhi

Tis Hazari court in New Delhi sent Bhim Army chief Chandra Shekhar Aazad to 14-day judicial custody on Saturday. Aazad was arrested in connection with the violence in Old Delhi's Daryaganj area. Aazad, who was arrested earlier in the day, sought bail from the court on the ground that there is no evidence that he instigated the Jama Masjid crowd to go to Delhi Gate where the protesters had turned violent. However, the court turned down Aazad's bail plea.

Chandra Shekhar Aazad was taken to Delhi's Tihar jail after the court's order.

The police opposed his bail plea on the ground that he may threaten witnesses and his judicial remand is necessary for the sake of law and order.

The court dismissed his bail plea and sent him to 14 days' judicial custody.

"Considering that substantial grounds for granting bail to the accused are not made out. Accordingly, the application of accused for grant of bail stands dismissed and accused be sent to judicial custody for 14 days and thereafter be produced before the concerned court for further orders," said Metropolitan Magistrate while dismissing Aazad's bail plea.

Earlier, a lawyer had requested the court to direct the investigating officer to give details of Aazad's whereabouts.

On Saturday, the court also sent 15 people arrested in connection with the violence in Daryaganj to two days' judicial custody.

Aazad's outfit had organised a march from Jama Masjid to Jantar Mantar on Friday against the new citizenship law, despite not having permission from police.

The protesters marching towards Jantar Mantar from Jama Masjid were stopped by police and paramilitary personnel near Delhi Gate, after which they turned violent and set a car on fire and damaged a few other vehicles. Police resorted to lathi-charge and used a water cannon to control the situation.

(With agency inputs)

Also Read | Who is Bhim Army Chief Chandrashekhar Azad?

Watch | Bhim Army's Chandrashekhar Azad leads protests at Delhi's Jama Masjid after Friday prayers

Latest India News
