Pro and anti-CAA protests: Heavy-weights likely to turn up at two separate public meetings in South Mumbai on Friday

CAA

NRC

Friday

protest

Azad Maidan

Umar Khalid

August Kranti Maidan

Devendra Fadnavis

: Security has been tightened in South Mumbai in view of two massive gatherings -- in favour of and against the Citizenship Amendment Act () and the National Register of Citizens ()-- which have been scheduled forafternoon.At around 3 pm, ameet against the CAA and NRC has been planned under the aegis of the Joint Action Committee for Social Justice (JACSJ), an umbrella body representing various minority welfare and cultural bodies and non profits at the, near the BMC headquarters.The meet was originally scheduled to be a rally, starting from Byculla and culminating at Azad Maidan. However, after the Mumbai police refused to grant permission for the rally, it was converted into a meeting at Azad Maidan.A JACSJ spokesperson told Mirror Online that members of various organisations like the Students Islamic Organisation of India (SIO), Samata Vidyarthi Aghadi and four students' group from the IIT, Bombay are going to participate in the meet. The meet will be addressed by the Jawaharlal Nehru University (JNU) students' union leadersand Aafreen Fatma, Hammad of Jamia Millia Islamia students' union, Masqoor Ahmad Usmani of the Aligarh Muslim University students union, while justice BJ Kolse-Patil will be the chief guest on the occasion. "The meet is scheduled to end by 6 pm," the spokesperson said adding that around 16,000-20,000 persons are likely to turn up for the event.The other meet "#CAASupportMarch" in support of CAA and NRC has been planned at theat around 4 pm. Senior Bharatiya Janata Party (BJP) functionaries and seers will attend the march. Media co-ordinator for the meet, Omprakash Chouhan said that former Chief Minister, Ranjit Savarkar (grandson of freedom fighter VD Savarkar), Nitin More (president of Jaybhim Army), Anand Palsikar and Girish Shah are the main participants of the event. The Mumbai police have refused to give permission for a rally, earlier scheduled to be taken out from the venue to the Girgaum Chowpatty, by the participants at the meet.Meanwhile, Mumbai police spokesperson Pranay Ashok said that adequate security deployment will be made at both the venues to prevent any untoward incident and control the crowd. As many as 2,000 uniformed policemen, drawn from the reserve forces like the State Reserve Police Force (SRPF), Local Arms apart from strike forces from the Riot Control Police (RCP), Quick Response Team (QRT) will be deployed at both the venues to assist the local police in the security scheme. Police would also be deploying drones and put up mobile CCTV units to keep a watch on the crowd and look out for potential trouble makers.Meanwhie, two spearate anti-CAA, NRC meetings were held in the city on Thursday at Dadar and Malwani, respectively. No untoward incident had been reported at both the places.
