Rape of 4-yr-old: Pvt school principal, 2 others also held

PATIALA: The public outrage in Sangrur continued for the second day over the rape of a 4-year-old girl in a private school during parents-teacher meeting on Saturday. All schools in the town remained shut even as protests continued over demand of arrest of authorities of the private school where a helper had raped the child. Later in the day, police arrested three persons, including school principal.The police had arrested the 27-year-old accused on Sunday within a few hours of the complaint being filed. On Sunday evening, residents had taken out a candle march to protest the crime that has shaken the whole state.On Monday morning, residents of the sleepy town again staged a protest and blocked the main road for a few hours.Under public pressure, police registered a case against the school authorities and arrested three members of the private school, including the woman principal. The police said that the three were booked under sections of the Protection of Children against Sexual Offences (POCSO) Act as they had failed to inform the police about the crime. "Under the POCSO Act, it is mandatory for the authorities of an institute or others to inform the police about the crime. The school authorities were duty bound to report the matter to the police but they failed to inform following which we have arrested three members of the school core committee," Sangrur SSP Sandeep Garg said.Garg said residents had ended their protest in the evening and condition of the rape survivor was now stable. He said that summer vacations have been announced and this may be the reason behind schools being shut in the town.The police got four day remand of the main accused who worked as a helper bus of the private school and had allegedly raped the child. He allegedly took the girl away from her parents on the pretext of playing with her when they were busy in meeting school teachers. He then took her a toilet and raped her. The matter came to light on Sunday morning when the girl started complaining about the pain and revealed the ordeal to her mother. The rape survivor was rushed to a local hospital where doctors informed the police and conducted a medical examination.
