Kannada my state’s principal language: Yediyurappa

Kannada my state’s principal language: Yediyurappa He deviated from his usual practice by tweeting in English rather than Kannada

| Bangalore | Published 16.09.19, 07:58 PM

Karnataka’s BJP chief minister, B.S. Yediyurappa, said on Monday that all Indian languages were equal, appearing to differ with party president and Union home minister Amit Shah over according primacy to Hindi. “All official languages in our country are equal. However, as far as Karnataka is concerned, Kannada is the principal language. We will never compromise its importance and are committed to promote Kannada and our state’s culture,” he tweeted.

Advertisement

Shah had on Saturday tweeted that it was “extremely necessary to have one language for the whole country that will be India’s identity” and identified Hindi as that language, triggering protests from politicians across the southern states. Yediyurappa’s comments come at a time when BJP leaders in Karnataka have been running for cover, faced with stinging remarks from Congress and Janata Dal Secular politicians and even ordinary people over Shah’s stand.

While deputy chief minister Govind Karjol had spoken out strongly in favour of Kannada on Sunday, the chief minister’s silence over the past two days had prompted questions. Yediyurappa has now answered the doubts. He deviated from his usual practice by tweeting in English rather than Kannada, as though seeking to send a message to the whole country. Karjol had earlier said: “The Mughals, Portuguese and the British ruled Karnataka but couldn’t destroy Kannada, which is at least 2,500 years old. As long as there are people in this state, Kannada will thrive.” Other state BJP leaders had been cautious. The minister for primary and secondary education, S. Suresh Kumar, had tried to walk a tightrope as pro-Kannada activists hit the streets within minutes of Shah’s comments. “Opposition parties are misinterpreting what Shah said. It is beyond doubt that Kannada will remain supreme in Karnataka. People will not learn a language that is imposed. But Hindi is India’s identity overseas,” Kumar said. The BJP Lok Sabha member from Gulbarga, Umesh Jadhav, too suggested that Shah had not opposed the promotion of state languages. “Of course, it is not good to impose any language. Everybody has the freedom to choose and speak any language. Shah did not object to promoting state languages, he only aired an opinion about the need to have one-nation-one-language,” Jadhav said. Congress legislature party leader P.C. Siddaramaiah continued to attack Shah’s remarks. In a tweet on Sunday, the former chief minister likened the BJP national president to a “home wrecker”. “India has a rich history & diverse geography. Each explains its own vibrant culture & practice. We have to embrace the diversity to remain united,” he wrote. “Amit Shah is like a wicked insider in a joint family who find ways to break the unity. This home wrecker needs to be taught a lesson.”
