While India Sees Kashmir as Its Land, Pakistan 'Feels Extremely Linked' to Kashmiri Muslims – Author

India-China Tensions Over Ladakh UT

Meanwhile, New Delhi's recent legislative initiative has also stepped up the border dispute with China over Ladakh. Beijing opposed India's decision to turn Ladakh into a separate union territory, as both countries claim a considerable area in the region.

Responding to Beijing's concerns, New Delhi pointed out that the newly-organised UT does not have any impact on the status of the Line of Actual Control (LAC) between India and China-controlled territories.

On 11 September, Indian and Chinese troops engaged in a face-off near the northern bank of Lake Pangong Tso in the region, but disengaged after negotiations between the two sides. A few days later India kicked off massive military drills in the high altitude area of Eastern Ladakh, involving transport aircraft, battle tanks, and combat helicopters.

"So, while this is going on between India and Pakistan, China is the silent partner watching; and India has to understand that a conflict with Pakistan will mean a conflict not only with Pakistan but with Pakistan and China. That’s not something that one wants to imagine", Dr Ahmed remarks.

Why Overlooking the Kashmir Dispute is Fraught With Risk for Western Powers

The author warns that the unsolved Kashmir dispute is threatening Washington's dominance in the region, especially given the expected US withdrawal from Afghanistan. She suggests that Pakistan still remains a key for Central Asia and the Middle East, adding that China and Russia are filling the vacuum of power left by the US.

"This kind of casual disengagement from the Indian-Kashmiri crisis on the base of the United States is deeply hurting its future potential for allegiances", she says. "And allegiances are going to change over activities like this; Pakistan is already much closer to China than it ever was, and China came in, and Russia has come in also in the post-American vacuum after Afghanistan… [The US] is going to have to come back and ask help from Pakistan which is on the border of Iran, with which US-Iranian tensions are rising; and there is going to be cataclysmal aftermath in Afghanistan that will probably also require some form of American response".

According to Dr Ahmed, Moscow and Beijing may emerge as powerful mediators in the longstanding dispute, while Washington's strategy of ignoring the Kashmir issue is fraught with risks not only for India and Pakistan, but the Western world in general.

"So, if I was a Chinese leader or if I am a Russian leader, I am looking for the opportunities, going in and thinking about stabilising because these people are completely friendless and completely defenceless against one of the world’s most powerful militaries; and that cannot be allowed to happen", she concludes.
