Residents threaten to start a protest in Ghaziabad

GHAZIABAD: A residents’ group has threatened to launch protests in Ghaziabad if the ban on diesel gensets is implemented in the city without working out a feasible solution.The Federation of Apartment Owners Association (FedAOA) also pointed out that group housing societies do not have the mechanism to separate power supply from gensets to lifts and other parts of a housing society, which makes the EPCA order restricting use of gensets for elevator services impractical.Moreover, AOAs have decided to oppose the move in case the authorities try to implement it in Ghaziabad. Alok Kumar, convener of the FedAOA, said, “We will oppose the ban. It is practically not possible to implement it here. Residents will be in big trouble. Moreover, there’s a large number of flats in various societies which do not get sunlight properly. They will plunge into darkness during an outage.”Pawan Tyagi, who heads the residents’ association at Classic Residency in Raj Nagar Extension, said people were in panic mode and sharing contradictory media reports on WhatsApp groups, which is fuelling the confusion about use of gensets. “We have not received any official information about it (the ban on gensets) so far and will be using gensets in case of power outages,” he said.Though some societies in Raj Nagar Extension reported power cuts, the discom, PVVNL, said there was no shortage in supply of electricity. It put its daily power supply at an average of 23 hours and 36 minutes.PVVNL chief engineer Rakesh Kumar said, “We have also formed patrolling teams to identify shortcomings and rectify them before Diwali and requested the National Highways Authority of India (NHAI), RRTS (rapid rail) and the municipal corporation to work with extra caution so that transmission lines are not damaged.”District magistrate Ajay Shankar Pandey has formed a GRAP implementation squad (GIS) to oversee measures to minimise pollution levels in the district. Pandey said he will be heading the GIS, which has 28 members from various departments. The squad will ensure implementation of steps under the Graded Response Action Plan (GRAP), which kicked in on October 15.At present, Ghaziabad’s air quality index is in the “poor” category.
