Onus for Kashmir solution lies as much with Pakistan as with India: Dawn columnist

The campaign must aim at domestic politics by mobilising public opinion about humanitarian issues, and project an air of international crisis in the foreign policy establishment.

The US congressional hearing on the human rights of Kashmiris on Oct 22 was just one example of the positive result of such an effort.

If successful, the campaign may taint India's international standing but, by itself, it will not be enough. It could be consequential only along with any other cost of India's brutal repression.

The cost may include potential domestic instability, harm to Pakistan-India relations, threat to regional peace, risk of war, and loss of economic opportunities for India.

So how does Pakistan raise the cost? Through a comprehensive national strategy.

Pakistan has to ensure that the outsiders' view of Indian repression is not obscured by Indian allegations of terrorism by taking a firm action against jihadists and raising its own international standing. India's rise has been exaggerated by Pakistan's decline.

Pakistan will play a critical role in raising a voice for the Kashmiris internationally. But a country's voice cannot rise above its image.

Agreed, Pakistan is not supporting the jihadists but as long as it is perceived that they are present in Pakistan, there will be suspicions of a liaison. Compliance with FATF demands will also be a challenge.

The refrain in Washington is that Pakistan must prevent militant groups from operating on its soil. India is not the only factor here.

Militants have relations with the Afghan Taliban and can affect Afghanistan's peace process. Washington is understandably concerned. And so should be Pakistan. Instability in Afghanistan will affect both, Pakistan's stability and the Kashmir cause.

One hopes Pakistan realises that external challenges must not be fought at the cost of internal order and stability. Security, economic progress and political stability are all interconnected.

As an aggregate of national strength, they should enhance rather than weaken each other. By raising its national strength Pakistan will enhance its value as an economic partner for India. Ignoring Pakistan will add to the cost of India's repression of Kashmiris.

There is going to be a fierce clash of wills. Indian prime minister Narendra Modi will continue with repression, attempt to buy Kashmiris' allegiance with economic incentives and strike political bargains with new collaborators, hoping it will pacify the area.

If he succeeds Pakistan must step back and rethink its strategy. It should not get ahead of Kashmiris.
