Sharad Pawar warns rebel MLAs; says Ajit Pawar's action 'against party line'

Uddhav Thackeray and Sharad Pawar addressed a press conference today | Photo Credit: ANI

Key Highlights Devendra Fadnavis sworn in as Maharashtra CM with support of NCP leader Ajit Pawar and his supporters Sharad Pawar said Ajit unilaterally took the decision without consulting him Pawar warned rebel MLAs that they stand to lose Assembly membership if anti-defection law is evoked against them

Mumbai: After a midnight political coup staged by the Nationalist Congress Party (NCP) leader Ajit Pawar, Congress, NCP, and Shiv Sena in a joint press briefing claimed BJP won’t be able to prove majority despite its new-found MLAs.

NCP chief Sharad Pawar distanced himself from his nephew Ajit Pawar's decision to back Devendra Fadnavis “against the party line”. He said disciplinary action will be taken against Ajit.

He also warned the rebel MLAs that action will be taken against them under the anti-defection law if they back Ajit Pawar and risk losing their Assembly membership.

While addressing a joint press conference at YB Chavan Centre in Mumbai with Shiv Sena chief Uddhav Thackeray, the NCP president said no NCP leader is in favour of a BJP-NCP government.

"Ajit Pawar's decision is against the party line and is indiscipline," he said.

"All the MLAs who are going must know that there is an anti-defection law and the possibility of them losing their assembly membership is high. Even the voters of their respective constituency will also be angry with them," he said.

Two more NCP MLAs Sandip Kshirsagar and Sunil Bhusara also allege that they were unknowingly taken to the oath ceremony and that now they have come back and expressed support to Sharad Pawar. https://t.co/sLx19ngw2w pic.twitter.com/CechUAcQW4 — ANI (@ANI) November 23, 2019

The NCP also brought its MLAs to the press conference who claimed they were called to the Governor’s residence but did not know of Ajit Pawar’s intentions.

“Ajit Pawar had called me to discuss something and from there I was taken with other MLAs to Raj Bhavan. Before we could understand the oath ceremony was complete. I rushed to Pawar Sahab and told him I am with Sharad Pawar and NCP,” NCP MLA Rajendra Shingane said.

The claim was also backed by NCP lawmakers Sandip Kshirsagar and Sunil Bhusara who also alleged that they were unknowingly taken to the Devendra Fadnavis’s oath ceremony. They said that they have come back and expressed support for Sharad Pawar.

Pawar said Congress, NCP and Shiv Sena had decided to form the government.

"We have the numbers to form the government. Several independent are also with us," Pawar added. NCP won 54 seats while Shiv Sena got 56 and Congress 44.

Pre-poll alliance partners BJP and Shiv Sena emerged as the largest parties securing 161 seats in the elections. Shiv Sena walked out of the alliance after BJP did not agree to the former’s demand for sharing the post of chief minister for 2.5 years. Sena’s only minister in PM Narendra Modi’s cabinet - Arvind Sawant - resigned over the issue.
