Bill today, students on govt mind

A clause in the bill exempting some regions of the Northeast has so far failed to sway the protesters

The bill, which aims to grant citizenship to persecuted non-Muslim refugees from Bangladesh, Pakistan and Afghanistan, is the first such measure that can introduce religion into citizenship laws in India. Several Opposition parties have vowed to oppose the bill in Parliament but fear that the government has already managed the numbers.

As Union home minister Amit Shah prepared to table the Citizenship (Amendment) Bill in the Lok Sabha on Monday, the government side appeared to be worried not about Opposition warhorses but students in the Northeast.

Against such a backdrop, Assam chief minister and BJP leader Sarbananda Sonowal on Sunday appealed to students to stay away from growing protests in the Northeast.

The Northeast protests are being spearheaded largely by students who have objected to foreigners, regardless of their religion, being granted citizenship rights. A clause in the bill exempting some regions of the Northeast has so far failed to sway the protesters.

On Sunday, Sonowal said: “The young generation of the state must endeavour to put Assam strongly on the world stage with hard work, dedication, honesty and sincerity and they must not while away the most productive time of their lives in movements and agitations. Building a robust work culture in the state should be the prime objective of everyone and youths must not be misled to join agitations based on concocted and baseless grounds.”

It was an unusual statement from a public figure in a state where milestone movements have largely been sustained by students over the decades.

The Assam chief minister sought to assure the people that the government would not do not anything to undermine the identity of the Assamese race.

The emotive nature of the issue involved is also becoming apparent.

On Sunday, hundreds of protesters ransacked the district head office of the Asom Gana Parishad (AGP) in Dibrugarh in Upper Assam. A BJP ally, the AGP, led by the student leaders of the Assam Agitation of the 1980s, is supporting the bill.

Concern spread beyond the borders too with the UK advising its nationals to take precautionary measures while visiting the Northeast, especially Assam.

On Sunday, the Foreign and Commonwealth Office (FCO) of the UK said: “From January 2019, protests have continued in Assam and other states in the North East of India. These protests are related to the revision of the National Register of Citizens (NRC) and a proposed CAB.”

The US government has already prohibited its employees from travelling to several states of the region.

The state police have issued an alert across the state. Assam director-general of police Bhaskar Jyoti Mahanta said, “An alert has been sounded in the state. District superintendents of police have been asked to keep a sharp watch over any suspicious activity. Additional forces have been deployed in vulnerable locations.”

Sources said the security of several AGP and BJP leaders has been stepped up too after the attack on and ransacking of the AGP office in Dibrugarh.
