Rishi Nair hints at Ste Hay fightback

Hollyoaks star Rishi Nair has predicted that Sami Maalik will fight hard to protect his family as the show's far-right extremism storyline continues.

A shock new plot on the show will see Ste Hay's nasty feud with the Maalik family intensify thanks to newcomers Jonny Baxter and Stuart Sumner, who are subtly trying to radicalise him into anti-Islamic views.

Ste unfairly blames Misbah Maalik for the death of his sister Tegan Lomax and has also drawn Sami's younger brother Imran into the feud, making his life a misery too.

Speaking to Digital Spy about what's ahead as the story gathers pace, Rishi explained: "We've seen before that Sami will go very far to protect his family. He's willing to push the boundaries to do what he thinks is right. We know that he can go to those extremes.

Lime Pictures

"After everything Imran has gone through, Sami feels even more protective over him. It'll be interesting to see how he reacts to what's ahead and how far it goes.

"I think Sami won't stand for much. I think he would go far to protect his loved ones. He's done with setting people up for murder now, but he is quite protective and it could get quite explosive. It could be a case of 'fire meets fire' along the way."

Sami is one of the characters taking centre stage in a special episode on E4 tonight (March 13), as he gathers with his family for a meal at the Maalik house.

Lime Pictures

Things get off to a tense start when Aunty Kameela goes behind Sami's back to invite Liberty Savage along. Sami also challenges his family's decision to make the gathering so traditional.

These scenes coincide with Ste meeting Jonny and Stuart's dangerous associates at a pub, still unaware of their true motivations.

Rishi continued: "I've never been part of a one-off special before, so that was quite exciting and I was happy about that.

"What's interesting is you see the clash within the Maaliks. You have Aunty Kameela who's very proud of her heritage and so is Sami, but he feels quite British as well. He feels that's not being shown at that lunch and that's what he gets frustrated about.

Lime Pictures

"Yazz, Imran and Farrah are caught in the middle and torn between the two. I think that's quite representative of how a lot of Asians who were born in the UK feel. You'd be in England and be referred to as 'the Asian guy', then go to India and be called 'the English guy' and not knowing where you sit.

"The far-right storyline is one that I'm really passionate about personally. It's a story that needs to be told and I'm proud to be part of that. Essentially what we want is to get people talking about it and having a conversation.

"If people out there have suffered racism, hopefully it will help them to speak out and get help. It emphasises that it's not right and we shouldn't tolerate it. I think it's great and I just hope it hits home for a lot of the viewers."

Hollyoaks airs the special episode tonight (March 13) at 7pm on E4 and tomorrow (March 14) at 6.30pm on Channel 4.

Read more news, spoilers and gossip on our Hollyoaks homepage

Digital Spy Soap Scoop video - hit play below for all the latest Hollyoaks spoilers, as James's life hangs in the balance, and Prince and Romeo clash again.

Want up-to-the-minute soaps news, spoilers and gossip on your social feeds? Just hit 'Like' on our Digital Spy Soaps Facebook page and 'Follow' on our @soapscoop Twitter account.



This content is created and maintained by a third party, and imported onto this page to help users provide their email addresses. You may be able to find more information about this and similar content at piano.io
