Will oil from the US bring down your petrol bill?

Shale vs crude

Is it a substitute?

Impact

NEW DELHI: The US is expected to be within kissing distance of Saudi Arabia as the world’s top oil exporter in about half a decade, thanks to the rich deposits of oil shale and the resultant shale oil . To be sure, it's not the first time that the US is exploiting the oil as a strategic tool for geopolitics — in 1973, after OPEC 's Arab member nations imposed an oil embargo for Washington's support to Israel in the Arab-Israel war that nearly crippled the US economy, it banned oil exports for the next 40-odd years, till 2015.In the last four years, shale oil exports from the US have rocketed — while 2018 saw 2 million barrels of oil being exported, which was 70% more than what went out in 2017, this year it has already touched 3 million barrels a day. That's more than what Kuwait — a key OPEC member — exports, at 2.01 million barrels a day. The question is: will shale oil help India and Indians in the near future?Shale is a precursor to crude oil, which occurs in liquified form unlike shale oil- which is extracted from rocks, called oil shale through a process of pyrolysis (heating without using Oxygen), hydrogenation or thermal dissolution - all of which are high temperature processes. Oil shale - the rock from which shale oil is extracted - is in a solid state as it has not been subjected to as much pressure as crude oil to turn it into liquid form. Plus: while crude oil reserves globally are pegged at a little over 1.48 trillion barrels, shale oil reserves are estimated to be between 2.8 to 3.3 trillion barrels — a major part of which is in the US.Yes and no — yes, because it is being used for power generation purposes and can also be refined into diesel fuel, gasoline or liquid petroleum gas and no, because the cost and environmental impact of producing shale oil is far higher than crude oil. A gallon of shale oil can emit as much as 50% more CO2 than a gallon of conventional oil would over its given lifecycle from extraction to end use. Moreover, producing a barrel of shale oil consumes 5 barrels of water unlike producing crude oil.The fact that US shale oil exports are increasing is bound to have an impact on the global oil prices in the next five years — given that of the top three oil exporters , two will be non-OPEC countries, viz., the US and Russia, who will export nearly double of what Saudi Arabia, which has the largest reserves of conventional crude oil, will export. Moreover, the non-transport sector usage of oil is just about a fifth of the total consumption, with industrial consumption being the largest, at close to 50%, where shale oil can be used on a large scale.
