Cyclone Fani update: Tourists told to LEAVE coastal city Puri IMMEDIATELY as storm looms

Cyclone Fani: SEVERE storm nearing landfall by coast of India

top stories direct to your inbox SUBSCRIBE Invalid email Sign up to receive our rundown of the day'sdirect to your inbox We use your sign-up to provide content in ways you've consented to and to improve our understanding of you. This may include adverts from us and 3rd parties based on our understanding. You can unsubscribe at any time. More info

Cyclone Fani is powering towards the Indian coast with severe winds and heavy rain, with landfall expected by Friday, May 3. The cyclone is currently stationed 170 miles off the coast of India and strengthened rapidly on Monday and Tuesday. Hundreds of millions of people are in the path of the storm, which is expected to bring surges in low-lying areas. Cyclone Fani will be the most severe system to brace India since a 1999 cyclone, which killed 10,000 people.

The Indian government has issued warnings to local residents in the country and is in the process of evacuating some 800,000 people. Nearly 100,000 evacuees will come from the coastal city of Puri in the state of Odisha. Officials have shut down operations at two major ports on the state’s east coast, and rescuers are helping people evacuate from the low-lying areas. All schools and universities in the state are shut ahead of the storm’s arrival.

Cyclone Fani update: Tourists told to LEAVE coastal city Puri IMMEDIATELY as storm looms

Officials with the India Meteorological Department have released warnings for parts of the region. Heavy rainfall warnings for today through Saturday are issued for the following locations: - May 2: Visakhapatnam and Vijayanagaram and Srikakulam (AP), south coastal & adjoining interior Odisha. - May 3: Srikakulam (AP), coastal & adjoining districts of interior Odisha, coastal & adjoining districts of West Bengal. - May 4: Balasore, Mayurbhanj (Odisha), Gangetic West Bengal, Sub-Himalayan West Bengal & Sikkim, Arunachal Pradesh, Assam and Meghalaya

Cyclone Fani's path

Some parts of eastern India and Bangladesh could see six to 12 inches of rain. Once the cyclone strikes land on Friday, it will weaken and progress further into India towards West Bengal and Bangladesh. The coast guard and National Disaster Response Force are both on hand for deployment as the storm arrives. Two ships with doctors and divers have been placed at the port cities of Vishakapatnam and Chennai.

Preparation for cyclone Fani is underway
