PMC faces backlash over pruning trees

Politicos, citizens blame civic body for not clearing dried branches



After the death of an innocent woman, citizens and activists from the city have blamed the civic administration for its callous attitude towards addressing the threat of dried trees in monsoons. The issue was also raked up by city corporators at the general body meeting of the Pune Municipal Corporation (PMC) held on Thursday.



The death of 48-year-old speciallyabled woman, Jayshree Jagtap, after a tree branch fell on her head has raised safety concerns among residents and commuters. “There are many trees on Ghole Road where the branches have dried up and pose danger to commuters and pedestrians,” said Meena Dhotre, member of Prahar, a group working for the empowerment of the specially abled.



Dhotre was accompanying Jagtap when the incident occurred on Wednesday. “The issue has been raised with PMC officials but they always direct us to the local corporators,” she said, adding that the whole setup of stalls on the footpath and other factors threaten the safety of citizens.



However, such a scenario is not limited to Ghole Road and multiple areas in the city have witnessed such unexpected falling of trees and their branches due to incessant rains. “The chairman of our housing society had reported to the civic body about a dried tree on the premises. The issue was reported about a month ago and a meeting was also held with the officials concerned. However, no cognisance was taken,” said Swati Kartik, a student from Viman Nagar.



Talking to Mirror, Prakalp Tamhane, a city-based tree activist, said, “The blame of Wednesday’s unfortunate incident is on the PMC. The civic body officials conduct a survey in the month of June to identify dangerous trees. The incident only exposes the shoddy work of these officials.”



Mocking the PMC, Tamhane said that civic body officials show no delay when it comes to chopping off trees and branches when a property developer ask them for approvals. But such threats are rarely attended to, he added. Tamhane said that no environment activist would object to trimming of trees within limits if it concerns the safety of the citizens.



Meanwhile, BJP corporator Aditya Malve said that the family of the deceased should be given necessary help. Mayor Mukta Tilak too has demanded that the administration provide monetary aid to the family from the accident insurance scheme.



Nanda Lonkar, a corporator from Kondhwa, pointed out that a person was injured recently in a similar incident in her constituency and is now suffering from health issues. “There should be rules laid for builders on the types of species to be planted on the periphery. Some builders are seen planting banyan trees which eventually lead to cracks in the walls,” she added.



Talking to Mirror, Ganesh Sonune, member secretary of the PMC’s tree department, said, “Identifying trees that pose threat to the safety of citizens is an ongoing process. The ward officials in respective areas continuously monitor trees and its branches”



Sonune added that many trees have already been trimmed, but heavy rains sometimes uproot trees or weigh down the branches.


