Anti-CAA protests: 25,000 follow in Mahatma Gandhi’s footsteps near Gurugram

The protestors expressed their anger over the ‘discriminatory' Act

GURUGRAM: 72 years from the day Mahatma Gandhi had visited Ghasera village in Mewat district with a promise of a dignified life for the thousands of Muslims living in the area and urged them not to leave India, residents of the district which has a large Meo Muslim population, took out a huge protest against the implementation of the Citizenship Amendment Act. According to the district administration, around 20,000 to 25,000 people walked from Nuh to Gandhi Gram, located 8kms away in Ghasera.

Since morning, the protestors started gathering at the main Nuh town area and at around 11 am, they began their march towards Ghasera village where Gandhi had delivered the moving speech in 1947. The rally organised by Mewat Vikas Sabha and attended by locals, politicians and social workers, ended three and half hours later at 2:30 pm.

Through banners and slogans raised in choruses of impassioned voices, the protestors expressed their anger over the ‘discriminatory' Act. One of the posters read ‘Dharam ki rajneeti band karo, Samvidhan se checked bardasht nahi’(Stop politicising religion, alteration of the constitution will not be tolerated).

The organisers told TOI that they reject the Citizenship Amendment Act and the NRC in Assam and denounce the ‘police brutality’ on the students of Jamia Millia University and Aligarh Muslim University during their protest on Sunday.

As the entire district came to a standstill with schools and offices shut, locals claimed that this was the first time they saw such a big gathering. “Mewat has witnessed many protests but this is the biggest we have seen in our life. It says a lot about the anger and frustration amongst the people against the implementation of CAA,” said Shahzad Khan, a resident of Nuh. While some of the protestors marched, others covered the distance in their vehicles.

The protests are likely to continue this week and an even bigger protest is planned for Friday. Meanwhile, thousands will march from Mewat to Jantar Mantar on Thursday against the CAA.

Congress leader and MLA from Nuh, Aftab Ahmed told TOI, “We have been born and brought up in a country that has secularism at its heart. The CAA is against the constitution and citizenship can only be determined on the basis of birth or origin, not on the basis of religion.” He pointed out the irony that on the same day when Gandhi had offered people shelter in Ghasera, Mewatis had to come out in protest. He also slammed the action against students in Jamia.

Sources said the chief minister’s office was personally monitoring the situation in Mewat. In a statement about the security arrangements, Haryana police said that they are on alert and had already made the requisite arrangements to maintain law and order, and this ensured that Wednesday’s protest was peaceful.

“Police patrolling has been intensified to prevent any untoward incident. The additional forces would also be marshalled from within the state for deployment in case of any requirement. All measures have been taken to contain any kind of violence as well as the safety of citizens,” said Navdeep Singh Virk, Additional Director General of Police (Law and order). Sources said that the districts surrounding Mewat have also been put on high alert in the wake of the protests.


