Lok Sabha Election 2019: Sowing promises to reap votes

Rising price risks, falling crop prices, inconsistent policies, unsatisfactory institutional mechanisms and climate change – between 2015 and 2018, farmers have protested in large numbers over these issues across Maharashtra, Gujarat, Punjab, Madhya Pradesh. Thousands even marched to the national capital Delhi twice to make themselves heard. Suffice to say that alongside jobs, farm distress is one of the biggest election issues and has already been made a key talking point during the poll campaign.

The primacy of farm distress as a poll plank has been affirmed after both Bharatiya Janata Party (BJP) and its principal opponent Congress dedicated a lion's share of their vision document and manifesto, respectively, promising better days for farmers. However, this focus on farmer issues was amplified after Congress party's victory in prime agrarian states of the North; Madhya Pradesh (MP), Chhattisgarh and Rajasthan, where it was in a direct fight against the BJP.

Farm distress & Cong victory in state polls

The elections in MP, Chhattisgarh and Rajasthan were the first test for Rahul Gandhi. The three states went to polls within a year of Gandhi's election as Congress president. Gandhi effectively began his campaign for the elections from Mandsaur, in MP's Malwa region in June 2018. In 2017, Mandsaur had witnessed a major farmer agitation and six farmers were killed in police firing during that agitation.

Soon, as the campaigning progressed, Gandhi tapped into anger and resentment among farmers against the incumbent BJP governments in all three states. Gandhi then also went on to announce an immediate farm loan waiver if his party was voted to power. Following Congress party's victory, the states acted on their promise strengthening the anti-BJP resentment among farmers.

Key farmer issues & PM-Kisan scheme

The instability in prices and rising input costs are two of the core problems staring at farmers today. One of the major instances in price instability was the protests by milk and tomato farmers across Maharashtra. Last July, farmers in Maharashtra went on a flash strike in major cities and towns after wholesale milk prices crashed below Rs 20 per litre. Farmers affiliated to Raju Shetti's Swabhiman Shetkari Sanghatana were at the forefront of the protests and the country was hooked to television as farmers emptied milk tankers on highways.

In November 2017, farmers organised a massive Kisan Mukti Sansad where farmers affiliated to 185 organisations in 25 states of the country came together to put pressure on the government to increase profit margin by 50% over inputs costs. Some of these protests bore fruit. In October, following a massive protest on the Delhi-Ghaziabad border, the government increased the minimum support price of winter crops so that farmers earn 50% over the input costs. Later, in December, the government added 22 crops to this list.

However, the government made a bigger announcement in the interim budget and unveiled the Prime Minister Kisan Samman Nidhi Scheme. As part of the scheme, which was rolled out in February, small and marginal farmers and their families have combined land holding of up to two hectares will be provided direct income support of Rs.6,000 per year in three instalments of Rs.2,000 each.

Both BJP & Cong now offer minimum income support

The centre stage assumed by farmer issues has reflected in the manifestos of Congress, BJP and All India Trinamool Congress. PM Modi announced that doubling farmers income by 2022 would be one of BJP's key targets. The Congress, which released its manifesto ahead of BJP's vision document release, made a big announcement with its new Nyay (Nyuntam Aay Yojana) scheme.

The scheme, aimed at the poorest 20% in the country, promises minimum income support of Rs.72,000 per year. The beneficiaries will be identified as per the National Sample Survey Office data on income distribution. The Congress party also promised that in view of cases filed against farmers and harassment they face due to debt, non-repayment of debt will be made only a civil liability and no criminal proceedings will be carried out.

Close on the heels of this announcement, PM Modi said during BJP's vision document release that the PM-Kisan scheme will be expanded to all farmers in the country. Notwithstanding the grand promises of political parties, farmers will also vote keeping local factors in mind and only May 23 will tell which idea has captivated farmers the most.
