821 voters in Kokrajhar boycott election

GUWAHATI: A total of 821 voters in two villages in Baksa district - near the India-Bhutan border and under the Kokrajhar Lok Sabha constituency - boycotted the polls on Tuesday to protest against years of confusion over the development block they belong to.The two adjoining villages - Ekrajuli and Daimabari - are part of the Bodoland Territorial Council (BTC), which was set up under the Sixth Schedule of the Constitution in 2003. Both are around 12km south of the international border and for the past 16 years, they have been trying to ascertain which development block they fall under."Because of this confusion, we are deprived of many development works. Sometimes we are told that the two villages are under the Tamulpur development block. At other times, we are told we fall under the Nagrijuli development block. As a result, the villages lack the specific code number needed to obtain job cards under MNREGA," Bharat Rai, a resident of Ekrajuli, said, adding that before the creation of the BTC, the villages fell under the Tamulpur block.The locals of Ekrajuli and Daimabari - predominantly Gorkhas and Santhals - said they were using the code numbers of a third village to get job cards. "For how long will we borrow the code number of another village? We must get our legitimate rights," a villager said."The total number of voters in the two villages is 821 and every one of us boycotted the polls. How long will we live with this uncertainty?" said Rai, adding that the villagers had approached the BTC several times for clarity on the matter but to no avail.The Kokrajhar parliamentary constituency, which shares a border with Bhutan and West Bengal, has 17,65,423 voters. Till 7 pm, it had recorded a turnout of 76.16 per cent. The constituency covers three of the four districts of the BTC - Kokrajhar, Baksa and Chirang - and Barpeta.BTC chief Hagrama Mohilary, whose Bodoland People's Front (BPF) is an ally of BJP, said different communities living in the area will vote for BPF for quick development. The BPF has fielded social welfare minister Pramila Rani Brahma against incumbent Independent MP Naba Kumar Sarania, United People's Party (Liberal)'s Urkhao Gwra Brahma and Congress's Sabda Ram Rabha among a total of nine contestants.Sarania, a former Ulfa rebel, said he was optimistic about his re-election chances because of 'development in the last five years'.
