Cops scan clips for clues on suspects

Representative image

NOIDA: Police are scanning two CCTV clips to identify members of “Iranian gangs” suspected to have robbed a 47-year-old Iraqi national and the manager of a Gopal Dairy outlet over the past few weeks.

Police are currently showing 30 photographs of the suspects to the victims to identify them. Among the victims was Faris Sabeeb Talab, an interior designer from Iraq who was robbed of Rs 20 lakh — the money that was meant for the treatment of his brother Adnan at Jaypee Hospital.

Faris was standing around 100 metres from the hospital’s main gate with his other brother Samun and sister Fatima when three men in a WagonR stopped near him. The three men approached Faris, who was smoking a cigarette, and started shouting “police” and “hashish”.

“I told them it was a normal cigarette. They broke the cigarette to check the contents and started frisking me. They pulled out the belt I had tied to my waist and sped away with the $30,000 I had stored there,” Faris said though his interpreter Abdul Waris.

Faris has told the police that two of the accused seemed to be foreigners.

One of the videos in possession of TOI shows the WagonR stopping near Faris and the sequence of events. “It was my first day and I did not know how to react,” he said.

The spot where Faris was attacked is on the same road where another Iraqi national, Ahmed, was approached by three men in a similar manner.

In the second video, two heavily-built men and another lean person can be seen talking to the dairy manager.

Waris said that with the increasing attacks on tourists, interpreters like him are losing business. “Medical tourism has flourished in India, especially Gurgaon, in the past few years. However, the recent incidents of loot will affect the business in India,” he said.

Jaypee Hospital told TOI in a statement: “International patients are given lockers in their rooms and at the same time they are suggested not to walk around with huge amount in form of cash. The precautionary boards are also inserted at the entrance of the hospital in different foreign languages for international patients…”


