Unnao rape case: CBI filed chargesheets against BJP MLA Sengar last year, but trial yet to start

NEW DELHI: The Central Bureau of Investigation ( CBI ) had filed chargesheets against BJP MLA Kuldeep Singh Sengar in the Unnao rape case last year but the trial is yet to begin. Sengar, MLA from Bangarmau in Unnao, is currently lodged in Sitapur district jail The survivor, whose condition is said to be critical following a road accident, had approached the CBI in June seeking transfer of her case to Delhi where she has been relocated. However, the CBI does not have the power to transfer cases. The case is being investigated by CBI's Lucknow unit and Delhi's special crime unit is assisting in the probe.CBI officials visited the survivor in hospital on Monday and have sought information about the case and probe from UP police as she is also the prime witness in the rape case. The CBI had filed its chargesheet on the basis of her testimony.According to the survivor, she was raped on June 4, 2017. Her father was booked under Arms Act on April 8 last year and sent to jail for allegedly possessing an illegal gun. On May 17 last year, the CBI arrested SHO of Makhi police station Ashok Singh Bhaduriya and sub-inspector Kamta Prasad Singh for planting a gun on the survivor's father.The survivor had attempted self-immolation outside the chief minister's residence in Lucknow on April 8 last year. Next day, her father died in hospital, after being attacked in the jail.The CBI had taken over the case on April 12 last year and four cases were subsequently filed. While the main case pertained to the sexual assault on a minor girl, the second case was on the assault and subsequent death of the survivor's father in jail. The third case pertained to allegations of gang rape by three men including an aide of Sengar and the fourth was the counter complaint lodged by the accused MLA's brother alleging assault by the survivor's kin.On July 7 and 11, 2018, the CBI filed its chargesheet in two of the cases. In the first case, the MLA and a woman were charged under offences of abduction and rape while in the second, the CBI charged five people for murder of the survivor's father. A third chargesheet was filed against the MLA and others in the case of planting of weapon on the survivor's father.On speculation that the case would go weak in the event of the survivor's death, CBI sources said they had collected ample evidence against the accused which had been elaborated in the chargesheet. "Her statement before a magistrate has already been recorded under 164 CrPC which will corroborate our evidence and statements of other witnesses," an official said.
