Modi’s Sanghis And Hitler’s Nazis (Part Ii)

Khushwant Singh wrote in 2003, the fascist agenda of Hindu fanatics is unlike any thing we have experienced in our modern history. According to RSS philosophy all that south of the Himalayas and north of Indian Ocean is Bharat. One of the BJP’s central leader Ram Madhav in an interview to Al-Jazeera said they would like to see Pakistan and Bangladesh united with India. This concept of Akhand Bharat is again inspired from the Nazi philosophy of “Lebensraum” means living space. Lebensraum was the idea that land expansion was essential to the survival of German people being superior aryan race. Hitler considered Jews, a inferior race who occupied the new Nazi territories. Hitler agreed to this idea and mentioned lebensraum in his book Mein Kampf in 1924. In 1980the Bharatiya Jana Sangh political arm of RSS morphed into BJP. In 1980 elections BJP got only two seats. However in 1990 BJP gathered strength and India’s electoral milieu has seen surge of religious content with electoral success of Hindu nationlist BJP. BJP is again in power for the second time as its election campaign focused anti Pakistan and anti Islam. According to historian Mukherji, while referring to Nehru, he said “if fascism ever come to India it would come in the favour of majoritarian Hindu communalism”.The rising fascism in India and how RSS has manipulated majoritarianism to erect a body of bogey of Hindutva.

Edwarde Luce wrote in Gulf News that Modi has killed the spirit of Indian secularism in Gujrat. The region of Mohandas Gandhi’s birth has become a shrine of Nathuram Godse, the Hindu nationlist who assassinated him in 1948

In 2004 when Modi was chief minister of Gujrat, schools text books portrayed Hitler as a hero and glorified fascism. The tenth grade social studies text book had chapters entitled Hitler the supremo and international achievements of Nazism. The present chief minister of Uttar Pradesh, Yogi Adityanath has championed the cause of love Jihad muslim men marrying and impregnating Hindu women to change demographic balance and also ghar wapsi (home coming) which aims to convert minorities to Hinduism that they were originally Hindu. Again a concept inspired from Nazism as German women were told to avoid relationship with Jewish men. The national council for the promotion of Urdu language (NCPUL) which functions under the ministry of human development force the urdu authors to declare that the contents of their books supposed to be published by the NCPUL are not against country and government. According to Shrenik Rao a fellow at the University of Oxford’s Reuters Institute, he saw a post on facebook “Hari Om Heil Hitler” next to an image of Hitler. The cover picture read Aum, Hail Aryan, Hail Aryavant, meaning Hail Aryans, Hail land of Aryans. On 5 august Indian government scrapped article 370 and 35A which granted Kashmir special status after deploying additional 170000 troops in occupied Kashmir.After abrogation of article 370 and 35A actor Anupam Kher tweeted “Kashmir solution” which has similarity to a famous term “The final solution”. In 1942 it was the code name for the Nazi plan for genocide to murder Jews. The prime minister of Pakistan, Imran Khan has warned that India’s actions in Muslim majority Kashmir are an attempt to change the demography of Kashmir through ethnic cleansing and asked whether the world “watch and appease as they did Hitler at Munich”. In 1938 Munich pact was an agreement between Germany, Great Britain, France and Italy that allowed Nazi Germany to annex parts of Czechoslovakia and Lithuania. Edwarde Luce wrote in Gulf News that Modi has killed the spirit of Indian secularism in Gujrat. The region of Mohandas Gandhi’s birth has become a shrine of Nathuram Godse, the Hindu nationlist who assassinated him in 1948. BJP spear headed by RSS is trying to transform India into a purely a Hindu state where there is no place for other minorities. The BJP, RSS, BD and the VHP have created an atmosphere of fear among the minorities specially Muslims, Christian, Sikhs and Dalits. RSS was banned by the British and twice by Indian government after independence and also named a terrorist organization. At present there are several separatist movement across India. All the seven states in the northeast are fighting for independence followed by Kashmiri and Sikhs. There is also ongoing struggle by Naxalites in 13 of India’s 29 states to capture political power. This movement covers 40 percent of India’s geographical area and influence over 92000 square kilometers of the area. It is high time that international community must come forward to play its role to rescue the oppressed communities across India failing which the future consequence in the region is likely to be tragic and catastrophic not only for India but also for the region.

The writer is a retired brigadier and currently commissioner of the Afghan Refugees Organisation, Balochistan
