Family robbed at gunpoint in their home

robbers

Bengaluru

We suspect they could be hunters who had come looking for rabbits as it is a new residential layout. We are not ruling out the possibility of the gang being professional robbers. ­–A police officer

Three gun-wieldingattacked a MNC employee and threatened his family members at gun point, as they robbed gold ornaments, cash and other valuables worth around Rs 7.5 lakh from his house. The private firm employee who was walking in his compound at night was attacked severely with wooden sticks and left bleeding and immobile on the ground. After the robbery, the accused are said to have walked away confidently. The whole incident took place in the span of 10 to 12 minutes.The police suspect the robbers could be hunters who may have come looking for rabbits as they were equipped with a double barrel gun and head torch lights. The area is quite desolate, with very few houses.The victim has been identified as G Guru Prasad, 28, a resident of Balaji Layout inNorth. The incident happened in the wee hours of Monday. Prasad works at the RMZ IT park in Bellandur. Prasad and his family had moved to their own house in Balaji Layout just two months ago.Prasad said he was walking in the compound of his house when he spotted three men moving suspiciously on the street. He saw that they had head torches strapped on. When he asked them what they were doing in front of his house, they barged inside the compound and one of them attacked him with a stick. Prasad says he collapsed, bleeding profusely and he was unable to raise an alarm. “After I fell on the ground, the accused went inside my house and threatened my wife and cousin at gun point. They had a double barrel gun and they made my wife and cousin sit in a corner of the house. Two others searched the house for valuables and managed to take away cash and ornaments that were kept in the cupboards. Around 150 grams of gold ornaments and nearly three lakh in cash has been taken away by the accused,” Prasad told Mirror.According to Prasad, the accused were speaking in Kannada. “Of the three, the robber who assaulted me was aged around 50 years, while the others were in their mid-thirties. They looked like tribal people. After the robbery, they walked away without any fear of getting caught. As it was dark, it was not clear in which direction they went. They were on foot,” said Prasad.
