Top cop admits dept failed to check weapon-holders

Ludhiana: Commissioner of police Rakesh Agarwal has admitted that there was a lapse in checking the records of licensed weapon-holders.

He said he has already directed the officials concerned to start regular checking of records of weapons and ammunition issued.

On the night of September 13, two Congress workers, Jaswinder Singh Bindi and Jagdeep Singh Bulara, had opened fire in an inebriated condition, killing party leader Manjeet Singh of Guru Tegh Bahadur Nagar and injuring Delhi resident Sumit Saini at a restaurant here. The police investigation found that both the accused were facing criminal cases and yet possessed licensed weapons.

Talking to The Times of India, Agarwal said, “The licence of a person facing criminal cases ought to be cancelled. But there was no check on it. Verifications are done while issuing and renewing licences. But there is a need to have regular checks, so that such incidents can be averted. The officials have been directed to scan records. Action will be taken if discrepancies are found.”

When asked if restricted night timings for restaurants and bars was a sign of failed policing, he said, “First, Ludhiana residents should follow the orders, then something else can be thought of.”

Five FIRs registered

Teams of different police stations and PCR were on roads to keep a tab on liquor vends, restaurants, hotels and bars in the city on Monday night. Following the checks, Division 5 police registered FIRs under Section 188 of the IPC against Mayank Singh and Rachpal Singh, managers of Domino’s Pizza at Sarabha Nagar market; Tanish Kumar, owner of Shakti Om Dhaba, Pakhowal Road; Vishujit Prasad, a pan vendor near Aarti Chowk; Rahul Garg, owner, Madan Lal Rawat, manager, Iqbal Singh and Surinder Thakur, workers, of TRP Bar and Restaurant on Malhar Road; and Deepak Chourasiya, owner of Chourasiya Pan Corner, at the rear of Ansal Plaza, for violating the time-limit orders.

Near railway station in old city, PCR cops were seen asking liquor vendors and dhaba owners to close their shops.

‘Be vigilant, don’t allow armed men’

Police, on Tuesday, conducted a checking and awareness drive at the mall near Old Sessions Court Chowk, where the September 13 firing incident had taken place. While interacting with the security officials, police asked them to be vigilant and strict and not allow anyone to take weapons inside the mall. The store managers were told to be alert and inform the security officials or police if they saw anyone with a weapon.



Facebook Twitter Linkedin EMail
