Rape survivor's newborn buried alive in Surat

(The victim's identity has not been revealed to protect her privacy as per Supreme Court directives on cases related to sexual assault)

SURAT: As if the trauma of being raped , impregnated and deserted by a married man was not enough, a 17-year-old tribal girl in Surat district also underwent the agony of losing her newborn boy, who was allegedly buried alive by the accused in a bid destroy evidence of the crime.Four persons, including the alleged rapist Ashok Rathod, a tempo driver, his employer Mahesh Patel, who runs a decoration business, Dr Rashesh Gujarathi, a homoeopath and Rathod’s friend Jaydeep, were booked by Palsana police on Saturday.The survivor’s mother told police her complaint that Rathod befriended her daughter around two years ago and raped her in a farm in October 2017. Later, he raped her several times for a year by promising that he would marry her. In 2018, the girl informed Rathod that she was pregnant and he again promised to take the responsibility of the child, the complaint states. However, she had not revealed the pregnancy to her mother then.Around three months ago, the girl’s mother noticed some physical changes in her and started probing her. She broke down and confessed to her relationship with Rathod. The family then met Rathod at his house in Bhutpore village, but he did a volte face and flatly denied that the baby was his.Meanwhile, in June this year, his employer Mahesh Patel approached the girl’s family and offered help for medical examination. He took them to a doctor in Bardoli town, who in turn referred the girl to Dr Gujarathi’s Govind Prabha Arogya Kendra in Gopipura area of Surat. The minor was admitted and she delivered a baby boy in the first week of June.According to the girl’s mother, Dr Gujarathi and other accused connived and allegedly took away the baby boy and buried him alive in Baleshwar village, 20 km from Surat city. Police sources said Gujarathi was arrested in past too for his involvement in sex determination racket.Initially, the survivor’s parents refrained from approaching police fearing social stigma. They work as farm labourers. But when they narrated the trauma to their community members, some of them encouraged them to lodge a complaint.The accused were booked under various sections of Indian Penal Code including 376 (2)(j)(n) (repeated rape of minor), 315 (act done with intent to prevent child being born alive or to cause it to die after birth) and sections of of Protection of Children from Sexual Offences (POCSO) Act.AM Muniya, superintendent of police, Surat rural, said, “We are working to gather all the evidence including the body of newborn. We will do an in-depth investigation and no one involved will be spared. Further probe will names of more people involved.”None of the four have been arrested yet.
