Karnataka withstand Dube assault to clinch thriller

VIJAY HAZARE, 2019

Karnataka withstand Dube assault to clinch thriller

by Cricbuzz Staff • Last updated on

Gujarat skipper Parthiv Patel was the star of the show in Jaipur against Services © BCCI

Close encounters

Allrounder Shivam Dube's breathtaking assault against Karnataka was not enough to prevent Mumbai from losing an engrossing encounter by nine runs in Bangalore. Chasing 313, Mumbai were down and out when they lost their seventh wicket with still 106 runs to get. But Dube launched an assault, where he hit ten sixes and seven fours in his 67-ball 118 to pull Mumbai back into the contest. However, his wicket came at the right time for Karnataka who closed out the contest with 11 balls still left in the innings. Karnataka were earlier propelled by half-centuries from KL Rahul, Devdutt Padikkal and Manish Pandey.

Hyderabad and Andhra played out a thriller at Alur in which the former came out on top by a slender margin of seven runs. In a contest reduced to 20 overs per side, Hyderabad posted 171 on the board with Tilak Varma standing tall scoring 83 off just 59 balls. In the chase, even though Prasanth Kumar and Ricky Bhui hit half-centuries, Chama Milind's triple strike in the middle overs dented Andhra as Hyderabad squeezed their opposition to eke out a 7-run win.

Skipper Parthiv Patel was the star of the show in Jaipur against Services as Gujarat staged a strong comeback with the ball to pick up a 14-run win. Parthiv missed out on a century just by a solitary run but his knock had helped Gujarat post 279 on the board. Services at one stage were well placed in the chase at 230/3 in 43 overs before Gujarat tightened the screws. Services failed to get those 50 runs in the final seven overs as their middle order choked to gift Gujarat their seventh successive win.

In a low-scoring thriller at the Jaipuria Vidyalaya Ground in Jaipur, Jammu and Kashmir snatched a four-run win over Madhya Pradesh courtesy of an allround bowling performance. Gaurav Yadav was the star of the show in the first half of the day as his six-wicket haul bowled Jammu and Kashmir out for just 182. In the chase, Madhya Pradesh recovered from 48/4 to stay in the contest but Jammu and Kashmir kept striking at regular intervals. Avesh Khan threatened at the end with a cameo but the opposition held their nerve to fetch the tight win.

Best batting performances

Bengal skipper Abhimanyu Easwaran hit a sparkling unbeaten century as his side thrashed Bihar by nine wickets in Jaipur. Babul Kumar was the only batsman to star for Bihar as his 124-ball 93 helped them scratch past 200 but a target of 217 was brushed aside by Bengal with 58 balls left to spare. While Easwaran finished unbeaten on 112, Abhishek Raman at the other end made a patient unbeaten 61 to seal the win.

Nitish Rana capitalised on the platform provided by Delhi's top four and scored an enterprising half-century to star in his side's comfortable 63-run win over Odisha. Rana made a 45-ball 56 as Delhi made 299 in their quota of 50 overs. He then came back with the ball to pick up the crucial wicket of Odisha's top scorer Subhranshu Senapati and added one more to his kitty to finish with figures of 2 for 43 in 10 overs.

Veteran Yusuf Pathan also came up with an allround display in Baroda's 25-run win over Maharashtra. Yusuf was clearly the standout batsman on the day as no one apart from the 36-year-old went past 50. He slammed five sixes in his 80-ball 83 as Baroda set Maharashtra a target of 250. Yusuf also broke the lower middle order as he picked up three wickets to dent Maharashtra in the chase.

Veteran Arun Karthik blazed his way to an unbeaten 86 off just 68 balls as Puducherry thrashed Arunachal Pradesh by nine wickets in a one-sided encounter in Dehradun. Puducherry's bowlers were clinical with the ball and kept making incisions to bowl Arunachal Pradesh out for just 179 by the 43rd over before Arun Karthik completed the formalities with his attractive knock.

Top bowling spells

Roshan Alam's five-wicket haul wrecked Sikkim in Dehradun as Assam picked up a comfortable seven-wicket win. Sikkim collapsed spectacularly from 123 for 2 to get bowled out for just 176 by the 49th over with Alam finishing with figures of 5 for 30. Pallavkumar Das then smashed his way to an unbeaten 118 off just 116 deliveries to complete the victory with 80 balls to spare.

Barinder Sran and Bipul Sharma combined to down Mizoram in the most lopsided contest of the day. Batting first, Mizoram never got going as they were bowled out for a paltry 87 by the 40th over. Both Sran and Bipul Sharma picked up three wickets each in the innings. A target of 88 was polished off with ease as Chandigarh picked up a resounding ten-wicket win.

Despite posting only 214 on the board, Himachal Pradesh thrashed Haryana by 84 runs in Vadodara. No batsman from either side crossed fifty with the bowlers dominating proceedings. Chasing 215, only Chaitanya Bishnoi put up a resistance with the bat as Haryana surrendered meekly. Mayank Dagar was the star with the ball for Himachal Pradesh as the left-arm spinner ended with figures of 4 for 19 in his side's win.

Veer Pratap Singh made good use of the new ball at the start of the Jharkhand innings and came back to polish off the tail as well to finish with a five-wicket haul as Chhattisgarh romped home to a seven-wicket win. Chasing just 120 for the win, Ashutosh Singh led Chattisgarh's charge with a composed half-century as his side won by seven wickets with 129 balls to spare.

© Cricbuzz

TAGS

RELATED STORIES
