Kamlesh Tiwari Murder: UP Police Monitoring Social Media Accounts

In the aftermath of the murder of Hindu Samaj Party founder Kamlesh Tiwari, Uttar Pradesh Police have been closely monitoring social media to block any attempts at inciting communal hatred. In this regard, the UP Police has registered 32 cases in last 72 hours, officials have said.

READ | Kamlesh Tiwari Murder Case; Suspect Allegedly Involved In Planning

'We are monitoring social media'

Speaking to reporters on Tuesday, IG (law and order) Praveen Kumar said, "In last 72 hours we have taken action against 178 social media accounts and pages. During the same period, 32 cases have also been registered for using social media to incite hatred."

Earlier on October 20, DGP OP Singh had said that police is keeping a tab on social media to prevent any rumour-mongering. "We are monitoring social media. If required, we will take legal action so that no false information is spread among people. We are observing social media very deeply and minutely", he told reporters.

Earlier on Friday, October 18, Tiwari was shot dead in Lucknow. The leader of Hindu Mahasabha was attacked by unidentified assailants on Friday afternoon after they barged into Tiwari’s office. Soon after the attack, he was admitted to hospital where he succumbed to his injuries. While the assailants managed to flee the spot, a revolver was also recovered from the site of the crime. Police stated that the accused spent around 30 minutes with him on the pretext of gifting him sweets.

READ| Murderers Of Kamlesh Tiwari Nabbed From Gujarat Border

Two murderers caught by Gujarat ATS

Two murderers, who were the ones seen wearing saffron clothes in the CCTV footage following the killing of Kamlesh Tiwari, have been nabbed by Gujarat ATS. A team led by DIG Himanshu Shukla, ACP BP Rojiya, and ACP BH Chavda of Gujarat ATS have arrested the main murderers of the Hindu Mahasabha leader. The names of the accused are Ashfaqhussain Jakirhussain Shaikh (34) and Moinuddin Khurshid Pathan (27).

The duo was arrested near Shamlaji which falls near the Gujarat-Rajasthan border. Sources have also said that the accused had once also fled to Nepal to cover their tracks. However, they always had a plan to return to Surat from Nepal. They had reached Shahjahanpur on Sunday and then were apprehended on Tuesday from Shamlaji. Officials continue to maintain that the accused have no links to any organisations. Officials have also stated that Kamlesh Tiwari's murder was, in fact, a very localised conspiracy which is why they expected a slip up from the accused. "These are not professional killers and they don't have much experience as well. We expected them to return to Gujarat and that is why we had been aggressively trying to locate them. As soon as we found out that they are near Gujarat border, all our teams focused on apprehending them," said Himanshu Shukla, DIG Gujarat ATS.

READ | Shiv Sena Protests Against Kamlesh Tiwari's Murder In Lucknow

READ | Kamlesh Tiwari Murder: Maharashtra ATS Details Fourth Suspect's Arrest

(With inputs from ANI)


