Anger over ‘custodial’ death: UP police ‘crack’ robbery case, say deceased involved

The deceased, Sajan Shukla, was detained early on Tuesday. He fell unconscious at Piparpur police station and died on his way to hospital, police had claimed.

Amid outrage over the death of a 52-year-old man after he was detained on Tuesday in connection with a robbery case, UP police said on Wednesday that the man was involved in the robbery plan.

They also arrested three people and recovered Rs 3.50 lakh of the loot from them.

The deceased, Sajan Shukla, was detained early on Tuesday. He fell unconscious at Piparpur police station and died on his way to hospital, police had claimed.

However, Shukla’s family had alleged that he was tortured by the police.

Amethi SP Khyati Garg on Wednesday said, “On October 5, a total of Rs 26 lakh was looted from UCO Bank’s Bhadar branch manager Munish Kumar and cashier Anshu Singh at gun point by three assailants on a bike. Three arrested persons identified as Zakir Ali, Mohammad Anees and Sajid Ali were arrested Wednesday from Alampur railway crossing. A total of Rs 3.50 lakh in cash, a country made pistol and a bike used in the loot were recovered.”

Shukla had carried out surveillance of the area before the robbery, Garg said.

“Nadeem and Sahbaaz are absconding, while another will be identified after Nadeem is arrested…” she said, adding that the looted amount was distributed among the seven accused and Sajan got Rs 3 lakh.

According to police sources, Shukla and Zakir were associates and were charge-sheeted in a 2008 case in which a car was stolen from Gomti Nagar area of Lucknow. Sources added that Shukla’s involvement in the case was established by calls made between those arrested and Shukla.

Meanwhile, a magisterial inquiry has been ordered into Shukla’s death.

The Pratapgarh administration assured his family that their five-point demands, including a CBI probe, will be sent to the state government.

Other demands made by the family include the immediate arrest of the policemen facing murder charges, a weapons licence, job for both of Shukla’s son and a compensation of Rs 50 lakh.

A murder case of murder was registered against policemen of Piparpur police station and the Amethi district Special Operation Group (SOG) on Tuesday after Shukla’s death. While Garg had claimed that Shukla had committed suicide by consuming poison, the Piparpur station officer, Ravindar Singh, denied having any such information.

Shukla’s family has alleged that he died of police torture and was poisoned by the policemen.

“My elder brother was killed in police custody, and therefore we protested peacefully with our demands. We decided not to cremate the body and kept it outside my house… Senior officials met us on Wednesday afternoon and assured moving ahead with our demand..,” Om Prakash Shukla, the younger brother of the deceased, said.

Pratapgarh ADM Shatrughan Vaishya said that a memorandum of the family’s demands has been forwarded to the Chief Minister’s office.
