Unnao rape case: Opposition targets UP government, demands swift action

LUCKNOW: The death of the Unnao gang rape victim in Delhi on Friday night brought the UP state capital to a political boil. Opposition parties protested against the BJP-led Yogi Adityanath government, demanding swift action against the accused in the case, who had set the rape survivor on fire while she was on her way to court. She sustained 90% burns and died of a cardiac arrest at Delhi’s Safdarjung hospital.Even as different party leaders made a beeline for Unnao to meet the victim’s family, members of Congress who were sitting on protest outside the Vidhan Sabha were lathicharged by the police. Raising slogans like “balatkariyon ki sarkar nahi chaengi nahi chalegi”,(we don't want a government of rapists), party workers demanded the resignation of the chief minister. The workers also tried to gherao the UP BJP office later. The state police used force to disperse the agitating workers who were taken into custody and sent to the police lines.Earlier in the day, Samajwadi Party chief Akhilesh Yadav also sat on protest outside the Vidhan Sabha with party workers but left for Unnao later. Speaking exclusively to TOI, he blamed the Yogi Adityanath government squarely for the incident. "Our party’s protest will continue till tomorrow. We demand the resignation of the government and dare the police to arrest me," he said, announcing that condolence meets would be held in every district headquarter for the victim on Sunday.Cancelling her meetings with party cadre,Congress national general secretary Priyanka Gandhi , who had arrived in Lucknow on Friday, left for Unnao to meet the bereaved family on Saturday morning. She tweeted, "I pray for the bereaved family. I pray that God blesses them with courage to brave this situation."Priyanka also attacked the UP government and system for the entire incident. "While on a social level everyone is responsible for the incident but it surely exposes the failure of Uttar Pradesh government on the law and order front," she said in her tweet.She also raised questions on UP government related to the course of events in the case. "Why was no security given to the victim? Was any action initiated against the cops who did not register her FIR? What is the government doing to check rising crimes against women?" she asked.Meanwhile, BSP chief Mayawati sought an appointment with governor Anandiben Patel but said that since the governor was in Kanpur for some event, she was making an appeal to her through media."The UP governor is also a woman and can understand the pain of another woman. Since UP government doesn’t seem very serious, I have decided to meet the governor and request her to intervene in this matter and direct the UP government to take the strictest possible steps. However, since she is in Kanpur, I request her through the media to take up her constitutional duties," Mayawati said.The former UP CM also appealed to the Supreme Court to take suo moto cognisance of the multiple cases of rape, molestation and violence against women and direct state governments to take swift and strict action against the culprits.
