Pakistan CONDEMNS India - Imran Khan vows Pakistan 'SHALL RESPOND' as '300 killed'

Pakistan: Pre-emptive strike 'absolutely necessary' says Gokhale

top stories direct to your inbox SUBSCRIBE Invalid email Sign up to receive our rundown of the day'sdirect to your inbox We use your sign-up to provide content in ways you've consented to and to improve our understanding of you. This may include adverts from us and 3rd parties based on our understanding. You can unsubscribe at any time. More info

But Pakistan's top civilian and military leaders on Tuesday rejected India's comments that it had struck "terror camps" inside Pakistan, vowing to prove wrong India's claims and warning that it will retaliate to Indian aggression. Pakistan's National Security Committee (NSC), comprising top officials including Prime Minister Imran Khan and army chief Qamar Javed Bajwa, said in a statement that it "strongly rejected Indian claim of targeting an alleged terrorist camp near Balakot and the claim of heavy casualties." NSC said Khan will "engage with global leadership to expose irresponsible Indian policy". It also warned that "Pakistan shall respond at the time and place of its choosing" to Indian aggression.

Condeming what he called India's "grave aggresion", Mr Khan said he had warned Pakistan's armed forces and citizens to "remain prepared for all eventualities". A spokesman for India’s military said members of the militant group which claimed responsibility for a terror attack in Kashmir a fortnight ago were targeted in the bombing. And the country’s foreign secretary Vijay Gokhale said jets had carried out air strikes against a militant camp in Pakistani territory today. He said the airstrikes hit a training camp run by Jaish-e-Mohammed (JeM), which claimed responsibility for a suicide car bomb attack which killed at least 40 Indian paramilitary police in the disputed region on February 14.



The action was ordered as India said it had intelligence that Jaish was planning more attacks.



Mr Gokhale said: ”In the face of imminent danger, a pre-emptive strike became absolutely necessary. The existence of such training facilities, capable of training hundreds of jihadis could not have functioned without the knowledge of the Pakistani authorities.”

Indians burn an effigy depicting Pakistan as they celebrate after the air strikes

India launched the strikes in response to a terror attack earlier this month claimed by militants

Pakistan denies harbouring JeM, a primarily anti-India group that forged ties with al Qaeda and has been on a UN terror list since 2001.



In December 2001, Jaish fighters, along with members of another Pakistan-based militant group, Lashkar-e-Taiba, launched an attack on India's parliament, which almost resulted in the two countries going to war for a fourth time.



Mr Gokhale said "a very large number" of militants were killed in a strike on a training base in Balakot, a town in a remote valley in Pakistan's Khyber Pakhtunkhwa province, but did not provide a precise figure.



The commander of the camp was Maulana Yusuf Azhar, a brother-in-law of JeM leader Masood Azhar, Mr Gokhale said.



India vs Pakistan: Pakistan news networks are reporting on the latest conflict

India's PM Narendra Modi and Pakistani opposite number Imran Khan

A senior Indian government source said that 300 militants had been killed in the strikes, without providing any details.



Pakistan downplayed the severity of airstrike, saying its own warplanes had chased off the Indian aircraft, which had released their "payload" in a forested area, causing no casualties and no serious material damage.



Referring to an area in the Pakistan-held part of Kashmir, Pakistani military spokesman Major General Asif Ghafoor tweeted: ”Indian aircrafts intruded from Muzaffarabad sector.”



He said "facing timely and effective response from Pakistan Air Force", the Indian aircraft "released payload in haste, while escaping, which fell near Balakot. No casualties or damage".



Major General Asif Ghafoor tweeted pictures allegedly showing bomb craters

Indian nationals celebrate the air strikes while stood on a model plane

Mr Ghafoor tweeted four pictures of the alleged site where Indian aircraft dropped a payload near Balakot, purportedly showing a bomb crater in a forest area but no serious damage.



Pakistani villagers in the area where the Indian jets struck said they heard four loud bangs in the early hours of Tuesday but reported only one person was wounded.



Mohammad Ajmal, a 25-year-old who visited the site, said: "We saw fallen trees and one damaged house, and four craters where the bombs had fallen.”



Pakistan Foreign Minister Shah Mahmood Qureshi said on Tuesday that "better sense" should prevail, warning India not to challenge Pakistan.

Protestors in Pakistan burn an effigy of Mr Modi

India's Foreign Minister Vijay Gokhale said the air strikes were "absolutely necessary"

While Mr Gokhale did not comment on the status of the camps, India's minister of state for agriculture, Gajendra Singh Shekhawat, said on Twitter on Tuesday they had been "completely destroyed".



Indian television networks reported the airstrikes took place at 3.30am.



Balakot is about 50 km (30 miles) from LoC, the ceasefire line that is the de facto border in Kashmir, a Himalayan region that has been the cause of two of the three wars India and Pakistan have fought since the end of British colonial rule in 1947.



Analysts have alleged Pakistani militants have their training camps in the area, although Pakistan has always denied the presence of any such camps.

Imran Khan reaches out to Narendra Modi for peace talks

The raids were carried out by the Indian air force today
