Pakistan's Nuclear Arsenal Body Set to Meet in the Wake of Indian Air Strike

The NSC meeting was attended by Chairman Joint Chiefs of Staff Committee General Zubair Mahmood Hayat, Chief of the Army Staff (COAS) Gen Qamar Javed Bajwa, Chief of the Naval Staff Admiral Zafar Mahmood Abbasi, Chief of the Air Staff Air Chief Marshal Mujahid Anwar Khan and other military and civilian officials, including cabinet members.

Earlier in the day, India's Ministry of External Affairs claimed that the Indian Air Force conducted a night operation to dismantle the biggest training camp operated by Jaish-e-Mohammed in Balakot, Pakistan. The group had claimed responsibility for the suicide car bomb attack that killed at least 45 Indian paramilitary police in Pulwama district of Kashmir on 14 February.

READ MORE: India & Pakistan Attempting to Drum Up Support Following Pulwama Attack

After the attack, India blamed Pakistan for harbouring and protecting terrorists, accusing the country of having a "direct hand" in the incident. As a punitive measure, India has withdrawn Pakistan's most-favoured nation (MFN) status and raised customs duties on goods imported from Pakistan to 200 per cent.

Pakistan has, in turn, rejected the allegations of its involvement in the attack and said that this was New Delhi's strategy to divert international attention from human rights violations taking place in the Kashmir region. The two countries have gone through three wars over the contentious Kashmir region, but the conflict has not been resolved. The unstable situation in the region has led to the emergence of extremist groups.

In 2011, Pakistan confirmed that it had acquired tactical nuclear weapon capability with smaller nuclear warheads that are attached to short-range missiles (50-100km) as a deterrent against relatively small-scale conventional Indian attacks.

Pakistan has 140 to 150 nuclear warheads, compared with India's 130-140 warheads, according to the Stockholm International Peace Research Institute (SIPRI).
