Brunei To Pass Shocking Law Making Homosexuality Punishable By Death

Brunei is a small country near Malaysia that has been recently making news for all the wrong reasons. Already intolerant towards the LGBTQIA+ community, thanks to a law that made homosexuality punishable with up to 10 years of jail time, the country is now going to pass a worse law. Next week, the Kingdom is going to regress by centuries by making homosexuality punishable by stoning or whipping to death.

Per Brunei’s legal system, homosexuality falls under the purview of the same law that outlaws rape and sodomy

Much the way India’s Section 377, a relic of the British Raj, was a law that grouped together what our Victorian colonisers deemed “unnatural sex,” Brunei’s proposed law sees homosexuals as criminals who are at par with rapists and those guilty of sodomy. The same law also makes Muslims found guilty of adultery punishable by death. Since Islam allows men to have multiple wives, you don’t have to wrack your brains to figure out whom that law is meant for. Brunei also jails women for getting pregnant outside of marriage.

Since Brunei is a sultanate which follows Sharia law, citizens weren’t consulted before the formulation of this law

Despite efforts by international human rights groups to persuade Brunei’s rulers against passing this horrific law from April 3, 2019 onwards, there has been no comment or public announcement about this law, save a sneaky little change on the website of Brunei’s attorney general. This is because it is ruled by a sultan and is governed by Islamic Sharia law, and has a 67% Muslim population.

Intolerance towards the LGBTQIA+ community is not uncommon in religious nations in Asia, and is only increasing

If you thought conservative Christians in America and oppressive Arab regimes were the biggest threats to queer people, think again. Closer to home, some turbulent changes against the LGBTQIA+ community have been cropping up, as extremist regimes encourage religious ways of life.

Did you know that Myanmar still has that Section 377 which outlaws homosexuality? Near Brunei, Indonesia, which is also a Muslim-majority country with a “guided democracy,” is increasingly being accused of undercutting against liberal norms by committing raids against LGBTQ people. Even a seemingly “developed” country like Singapore doesn’t recognise same-sex relationships, outlaws relationships between gay men, and provides no legal protection against persecution to same-sex couples.

This is concerning because India, despite the recent outlawing of Section 377, is becoming an intolerant country fuelled by religious tension. Discrimination against LGBTQIA+ people is a part of that. BJP MP Subramaniam Swamy was quoted in 2018 saying homosexuality is “not normal", is "against Hindutva", and that our resources should be allocated towards "medical research to see if it can be cured." The RSS, BJP’s right-hand organisation, has called homosexuality “not compatible with norms of nature” even after the highest court in the land legalised it.

Not only is this proof of how regressive states that aren’t wholly secular can be, but that the first people to experience discrimination are those who are brave enough to live their truth.
