Mamata Banerjee plans ‘ambush’ at PM Narendra Modi’s rally: ‘Alarmed’ SPG writes to West Bengal DGP

West Bengal plans 'ambush' at PM Narendra Modi's rally | Photo Credit: ANI

Kolkata: The Special Protection Group (SPG), which is responsible for Prime Minister Narendra Modi’s security, has set off alarm bells ahead of the PM’s election campaign rallies in West Bengal on Thursday.

Today is the last day of campaigning in West Bengal, after the Election Commission on Wednesday, in an unprecedented action, curtailed the campaigning in the state following violence between BJP and TMC workers in Kolkata. The campaigning is set to end at 10 pm on Thursday, a day before the scheduled deadline.

PM Modi is set to address two rallies in West Bengal today – at Mathurapur and Dum Dum. Interestingly, West Bengal Chief Minister Mamata Banerjee has also scheduled a rally in Mathurapur just before PM’s rally.

This has raised concerns among the SPG, which has now written a letter to the state security establishment, including the state director general of police. Mamata’s rally is set to be held at a venue in Mathurapur, almost next to the PM’s rally venue.

Times Now reported that the letter, written by an SPG inspector general, has also been sent to the director of SPG to apprise him of the unfolding situation in West Bengal.

The letter talks about serious concerns regarding law and order situation at the venue of PM’s rally, especially in the wake of violence at BJP president Amit Shah’s roadshow in Kolkata earlier this week.

The SPG suspects clashes could be a possibility at the PM’s rally considering the workers of the two parties would be present in close proximity.

The six phases of Lok Sabha Elections in West Bengal so far has seen an unprecedented wave of violence and clashes between BJP and TMC workers. The situation forced the poll panel to act and curb the period of campaigning before the last phase on May 19.

Results of the Lok Sabha Elections 2019 will be announced on May 23.
