Delhi Man kidnaps Daughter of Woman refusing to Marry Him

"It was found registered under a fictitious name and address."

Delhi man Kamlesh was arrested after he kidnapped the daughter of a woman who refused to marry him.

He fell in love with a mother-of-four and told her he wanted to marry her, however, she refused so he abducted her daughter.

The woman lodged a complaint on June 3, 2019, and said her nine-year-old daughter did not return home after going to a nearby shop to buy eggs.

The police reviewed the CCTV and identified Kamlesh. In a statement, the police said:

“The egg-seller reported that the child had left his shop with the eggs at around 2:30 pm. The CCTVs installed at nearby shops were scanned and in the CCTV footage she was seen accompanying a motorcyclist as a pillion rider.”

They discovered that Kamlesh used to undertake repair work at the woman’s house.

Officers explained that Kamlesh befriended the child while working at the house. He used to give her sweets and money whenever he was in the area.

The woman told the police that Kamlesh had pressured her to marry him but she refused.

Following the information, they began a search for the suspect and the child. Twelve police teams were assembled in order to arrest Kamlesh.

A police statement said: “The mobile number of Kamlesh was obtained from the landlord and call records immediately were obtained.

“It was found registered under a fictitious name and address. The analysis of the call records revealed that the last call from this phone was made at around 8 pm when the device was in the area of Nizamuddin.

“Subsequently, the phone had been switched off.”

They also saw CCTV footage of the girl with the suspect at Nizamuddin Railway Station, Delhi.

“In one of the CCTV footage of Nizamuddin Railway Station, Kamlesh and the missing girl were seen entering the main platform at 7:45 pm.

“Their movement was further tracked to platform number three.

“It came to notice that one train namely Sampark Kranti had departed from this platform at around 8:20 pm and was scheduled to reach Mahoba, Uttar Pradesh at around 5:30 am.

“One team was sent by road to apprehend the suspect and recover the victim from Mahoba.”

They arrested the Delhi man at around 6 am and rescued the woman’s daughter.

Kamlesh was questioned and it was revealed that he planned to kidnap the woman’s daughter so that he pressure her into marrying him.

The police statement added: “The accused Kamlesh works as a mason. He has been working in Delhi over the past 12 years picking up odd jobs while living in rented rooms.

“He came in contact with the complainant when she hired him to repair her house.

“Over a period of time, he grew fond of her and proposed marriage. When she refused, he hatched up this plan to kidnap her child so he could pressurise her into marriage.”
