Article 15: Ayushmann Khurrana and Anubhav Sinha bond over poetry and food

Ayushmann Khurrana will be seen next in Anubhav Sinha's Article 15.

Ayushmann Khurrana loves writing and reading poems, especially in Hindi and Urdu, is known fact. His social media feed is testimony of the actor's craze for the languages and writing. Recently, poetry acted as a connecting thread between the Badhaai Ho actor and the director of Article 15, Anubhav Sinha, on the film's set in Lucknow.

The filmmaker, who is a self-confessed fan of poetry, music and local Indian cuisine, had a lot to share with Ayushmann on the aforementioned subjects.

During the entire shooting schedule of Article 15, which has been majorly shot in Lucknow, Ayushmann and Anubhav discussed the rich culture of Uttar Pradesh's poetry, music and food.

A source close to the development told DNA, "Ayushmann and Anubhav formed a connect over Hindi and Urdu poetry. The shayari legacy continued there almost every day, and they tried to imbibe some of it during their movie’s shoot."

Talking about Anubhav and Ayushmann's interest in poetry, the source added, "Anubhav has a great interest in poetry, and also understands local culture of UP. On his part, Ayushmann got to discuss and learn a lot more, including aspects about new films, from his director."

The actor-director duo share a common love for Lucknowi cuisine as well. The source added, "Wherever they shot, Ayushmann and Anubhav would get local delicacies from the eateries around the location. Lucknowi specialities like nalli nehari, kebabs, sheermal, tokri chaat, malai ki gilori and biryani would be on their menu almost every day. So much so that the lunch break on sets would be like a feast."

In Article 15, Ayushmann Khurrana plays the role of a cop, who seeks justice for two Dalit women who were gang raped and murdered by men from a higher caste. The culprits attempt to stage the murder as a case of honour killing.

Directed by Anubhav Sinha, Article 15 also stars Kumud Mishra, Zeeshan Ayyub, Isha Talwar, Manoj Pahwa, Sayani Gupta, M Nassar, Ashish Verma, Sushil Pandey, Shubrajyoti Bharat and Ronjini Chakraborty. It is slated to release on June 28.

ALSO READ | Ayushmann Khurrana shares Shuru Karein Kya from Article 15: Our society needs this song

ALSO READ | Shuru Karein Kya: Ayushmann Khurrana's angry rap from Article 15 is a call to action

ALSO READ | Article 15 trailer out: Ayushmann Khurrana is promising as ever in Anubhav Sinha's social drama
