Election 2019: Nation was living under fear of terror attacks in Congress' rule, says PM Modi

PM Modi in Bengaluru, Karnataka | Photo Credit: ANI

New Delhi: It's a sombre day at the hustings as the country mourns the martyrs of the Jallianwala Bagh massacre perpetrated by British Indian Army commander Colonel Reginald Dyer 100 years ago in Amritsar.

From President Ram Nath Kovind to Prime Minister Narendra Modi and Congress president Rahul Gandhi, political leaders across the spectrum paid their tribute to those who lost their lives in the slaughter of peaceful protesters on April 1919.

Prime Minister Narendra Modi has also tweeted paying tribute to all the martyrs of the massacre. "Today, when we observe 100 years of the horrific Jallianwala Bagh massacre, India pays tributes to all those martyred on that fateful day. Their valour and sacrifice will never be forgotten. Their memory inspires us to work even harder to build an India they would be proud of," PM tweeted.

Lok Sabha Elections News Updates:

11:30 pm: Telangana Rashtra Samithi (TRS) leader Nayakapu Venkatesh was arrested for clicking a picture in a strong room in Malkajgiri. Circle Inspector, Keesara police station says,"before sealing of strong room, Venkatesh attending as TRS' political agent clicked picture unauthorisedly."

11:10 pm: AIMIM chief Asaduddin Owaisi said that Bihar Chief Minister Nitish Kumar had immense love for Prime Minister Narendra Modi and the two make a pair as perfect as that of Laila and Majnu.

“Nitish Kumar aur Narendra Modi ki aashiqui badi mazboot ashiqui hai. Laila-majnu se bhi zyada mohabbat in dono mein hai. Nitish Kumar aur Modi ki mohabbat ki dastaan jab likhi jaayegi, mujhse mat puchiye isme laila kaun hai majnu kaun hai, aap tay kijiye. (The love between Nitish Kumar and Narendra Modi is very strong. They love each other more than Laila Majnu. When their love story will be written, don’t ask me, who will be Laila and who will be Majnu, you decide for yourself),” Owaisi said, reported news agency ANI.

Asaduddin Owaisi: Laila aur majnu suno jab tumhari dastaan mohabbat ki likhi jaayegi, to mohabbat ka naam nahi likha jaayega us dastaan mein, nafrat ka naam likha jaayega tumhari dastaan mein, likhega ki jab se ye dono ek saath aaye, Hindustan mein Hindu-Muslim tanav mein hai... https://t.co/VoUHVAbNDh — ANI (@ANI) April 13, 2019

10:15 pm: 76-year-old Fakkad Baba form Mathura is contesting elections for 17th time even after losing his deposit 16 times. Till now he has contested eight assembly and eight Lok Sabha polls. He says, "I'm following my guru's order; he told me that I'll succeed in my 20th time".

10:00 pm: BJP leader Naresh Agarwal said, “23 (May) ko counting hogi (for Lok Sabha election), aur 24 ko Mayawati kahengi ki "main gathbandhan todti hu, 'Musalman' aur 'aheer' ne humko dokha diya" aur Akhilesh chaurahe pe banaron ki tarah ghumega, chaurahe par daudta dikhayi dega. (Counting of votes will be done on May 23 and the next day Mayawati will say that “I’m snapping ties with grand alliance”, “Muslims and Aheers betrayed us” while Akhilesh Yadav will run around the streets like monkey.)”

Naresh Agarwal, BJP, in Hardoi: 23 (May) ko counting hogi (for Lok Sabha election), aur 24 ko Mayawati kahengi ki "main gathbandhan todti hu, 'Musalman' aur 'aheer' ne humko dokha diya", aur Akhilesh chaurahe pe banaron ki tarah ghumega, chaurahe par daudta dikhayi dega. pic.twitter.com/pqovqiX1E4 — ANI UP (@ANINewsUP) April 13, 2019

9:20 pm: Stoking a controversy, Union minister and BJP leader Ashwini Kumar Choubey on Saturday said that former Bihar chief minister and RJD chief Lalu Prasad’s wife Rabri Devi should stay in “ghoonghat” (veil).

8:20 pm: "When blasts used to take place in the nation, the Congress government used to change its Home Minister, and put the entire blame on one person. But Modi doesn't change the Home Minister, Modi changes the ways," the PM said.

PM Modi in Bengaluru, Karnataka: When blasts used to take place in the nation, Congress government used to change its Home Minister, & put the entire blame on one person. But Modi doesn't change the Home Minister, Modi changes the ways. pic.twitter.com/WnpaEpJ6wK — ANI (@ANI) April 13, 2019

8:10 pm: "When Congress' 'mahamilavati' remote government was at Centre, didn't blasts occur in Bengaluru? Didn't the nation was living under fear of terror attacks? Did any major blast took place in the last five years of your "chowkidaar's chowkidaari". It was power of your one vote that made it possible" PM Modi said at a rally in Bengaluru.

7:50 pm: The Congress party on Saturday released a list of 18 candidates from Haryana, Madhya Pradesh and Uttar Pradesh for the Lok Sabha elections 2019. It fielded Kumari Selja from Ambala, Haryana and Deepender Singh Hooda from Rohtak.

Congress releases list of 18 candidates from Haryana (6), Madhya Pradesh (3) & Uttar Pradesh (9). Kumari Selja to contest from Ambala (Haryana) & Deepender Singh Hooda to contest from Rohtak (Haryana). #LokSabhaElections2019 pic.twitter.com/7rFRKUEsyO — ANI (@ANI) April 13, 2019

7:25 pm: Punjab: Shiromani Akali Dal (SAD) leader and former Cabinet Minister Mahesh Inder Singh Grewal has been named as the SAD-BJP candidate from Ludhiana constituency for the Lok Sabha elections 2019

5:24 pm: PM Modi while addressing a public meeting in Karnataka's Mangaluru had to stop his speech mid-way to urge some in the crowd to climb down from the trees. As the crowd swelled, some climbed the trees at the venue to catch a glimpse of the Prime Minister. "Dekhiye samhaliye apne aak ko, agar aap ko kuch ho gaya toh mujhe bhot dukh hoga( Please control yourself. If something happens to you, it will make me very sad".

#WATCH: Prime Minister Narendra Modi urges people to climb down the trees at his public rally in Mangaluru, as the crowd swells. #Karnataka pic.twitter.com/0SeGmY4ZH3 — ANI (@ANI) April 13, 2019

4:47 pm: Andhra Pradesh Chief Minister Chandrababu Naidu met Election Commission officials on Saturday: He claimed that the government is interfering in the voting through EC. "We have complained against EVMs earlier also. EC is an autonomous body but they are working at the instructions of Modi.

Andhra Pradesh CM Chandrababu Naidu after a meeting with EC officials: Govt of India is interfering through EC. We have complained against EVMs earlier also. EC is an autonomous body but they are working at the instructions of Modi. Transfers of officers in AP is unjustified. pic.twitter.com/HD2JxWckPC — ANI (@ANI) April 13, 2019

4:34 pm: West Bengal Chief Minister Mamata Banerjee on Saturday told the voters in Siliguri not to 'waste their votes' on Congress or CPM. She said the development in the state started after the TMC government came to power in the state.

West Bengal CM Mamata Banerjee in Siliguri: I would request all not to vote for CPM and also please do not waste your vote by giving it to Congress. I was in Congress then quit and formed Trinamool, following which you are witnessing development pic.twitter.com/8SmVofkuGS — ANI (@ANI) April 13, 2019

4:01 pm: PM Modi took a jibe at Congress' proposed NYAY scheme during a campaign speech in Tamil Nadu. Modi said, "Congress and dishonesty are best friends but sometimes by mistake they end up speaking the truth. Now they are saying- ‘Ab Hoga Nyay’. So they have admitted that all they have done so far is 'Anyay' or injustice".

3:36 pm: Actor-turned politcian Jai Prada responded to SP rival Azam Khan's 'nachne wali' jibe, saying despite being political opponent she always thought of him as a brother.

Jaya Prada, BJP candidate from Rampur: Maine Mulayam Singh ji ko bhi bataya ki meri ashleel tasveerein Rampur main ghuma rahe hain, mujhe bachaiye, lekin Rampur main kisi neta ne mujhe bachane ki koshish nahi ki, to mujhe Rampur majboori mein chhod ke jana pada. (2/2) https://t.co/xcPvcFlnK5 — ANI UP (@ANINewsUP) April 13, 2019

3:04 pm: While PM Modi was in Tamil Nadu, Congress president Rahul Gandhi was campaigning in neighbouring Karnataka. From Kollar, Rahul attacked the Prime Minister for criticizing his party's proposed 'NYAY' policy which promises to give Rs 72,000 per annum to the poorest 20 percent population of the country. He said, "when Congress announced NYAY, chowkidaar’s (referring to PM Modi) face shrank. He said where will the money come from? I want to tell Modiji, the money will come from your friend Anil Ambani".

2:31 pm: Holding his second rally in Tamil Nadu during the day, PM Narendra from the state's Ramanathapuram constituency said that after coming to power post May 23 his government will set up a water conservation ministry called 'Jan Shakti'. The BJP-allied AIADMK state government on April 3 declared a draught in 24 districts of the state.

After 23rd May, when Modi govt will once again assume office, there will be a separate ministry for 'Jal Shakti'. This ministry will cater to many aspects relating to water. The focus will be given on water conservation

1:33 pm: The BJP incumbent from Mathura, Hema Malini, who seeks a re-election from the constituency, speaking to ANI on Triple Talaq said, "Many minority community women support the BJP but even if they dont, you have to help everybody, doesn't matter who voted for us and who did not. This kind of feeling doesn't come to me. Everybody is different".

Hema Malini on Maneka Gandhi's statement on Muslim voters: On triple talaq issue many minority community women support us but even if they dont,you have to help everybody,doesn't matter who voted for us & who did not. This kind of feeling doesn't come to me.Everybody is different pic.twitter.com/YCGfKPZcE0 — ANI UP (@ANINewsUP) April 13, 2019

1:11 pm: Just ahead of phase two of the Lok Sabha, a massive controversy around the Rafale deal has surfaced. A French newspaper has claimed that Anil Ambani group given a huge tax break by the French government even as the NDA government was negotiating the Rafale deal.

French daily report sparks fight. Report cites 'tax waiver' to Ambani. 'NDA hiked the price to benefit Ambani.' @NikunjGargN with the details. pic.twitter.com/Kx6ycD9l3E — TIMES NOW (@TimesNow) April 13, 2019

12:47 pm: While speaking at a rally in Tamil Nadu's Theni, Prime Minister said, "From the helicopter I could see so many people on the roads and in this ground. I feel really happy that you have come to support us. And I feel like you are all saying, “tomorrow is ours, and all forty seats are ours.”

12:36 pm: On add on what she said on Friday, former Bihar CM Rabri Devi today revealed details of the purported deal between RJD and JDU. Rabri claimed that Nitish offered Tejashwi to be named CM candidate in 2020 state Assembly polls and wanted himself to named as PM candidate for 2019 general elections, claimed Rabri Devi.



12:11 pm: The Press Information Bureau has tweeted a collage from Bollywood's classic 'Devdas' to encourage voters to exercise their franchise.

11:38 am: "Babuji ne kaha gaon chhod do... Sab ne kaha Paro ko chhod do... Par koi bhi kahe main Vote dena nahi chhodunga," reads the PIB post.



11:11 am: On the 100th anniversary of one of the deadliest chapters in the British-India history, Congress president Rahul Gandhi pays tribute to the martyrs of the 1919 massacre at the Jallianwalla Bagh memorial.

10:48 am: “The cost of freedom must never ever be forgotten. We salute the people of India who gave everything they had for it. Jai Hind,” Gandhi writes in the visitors’ book at the memorial.



10:35 am: British High Commissioner Sir Dominic Asquith visits the memorial to pay tribute to martyrs of Jallianwala Bagh.

9:41 am: "The events of Jallianwala Bagh a 100 years ago reflect a shameful act in British India history. We deeply regret what happened and the suffering caused," Asquith writes in the visitors' book.



9:11 am: "Today, when we observe 100 years of the horrific Jallianwala Bagh massacre, India pays tributes to all those martyred on that fateful day. Their valour and sacrifice will never be forgotten. Their memory inspires us to work even harder to build an India they would be proud of," PM tweets to pay homage to the Jallainwala Bagh martyrs.
