We should never forget those who fell at Amritsar

I write to you in reference to your article Nanak Singh: the man who survived in the Amritsar Massacre (April 12). John Dennehy wrote a truly touching article recalling the story of Nanak Singh, a survivor of the Amritsar massacre, as recounted by his grandson Navdeep Suri, the Indian ambassador to the UAE.

This year marks the centenary of this brutal massacre during which British soldiers killed more than 600 innocent Indians. Mr Singh’s story is truly inspiring and reminds us to never forget our past. Such tragedies will always be remembered in Indian history.

K Ragavan, Bengaluru

The new government of Sudan must put people first

I write in reference to Mat Nashed's article Cautious optimism in Sudan as new head of transition vows civilian rule (April 14).

The recent developments in Sudan are certainly a concern for the global community. The people of Sudan are desperately looking for peace and stability in a country riddled with economic woes and repression. The world must take a stand against further bloodshed in Arab nations. The ongoing conflicts in Yemen, Libya and Syria have been claiming the lives of innocents for years and Sudan must not be permitted to go down the path of civil war.

In this context, the transitional military council in Sudan must first and foremost ensure that no civil conflict breaks out and that people’s lives are protected during this difficult period.

Meanwhile, it is also crucial for the country to establish a transparent civilian administration to ensure future peace and stability. Political parties, NGOs and government officials must come together to make sure that people’s lives are protected and economic reforms are wisely implemented in the interests of the Sudanese people. Proper education, employment and access to basic commodities must be the prime concern of any government that takes shape in Sudan in the near future.

Ramachandran Nair, Muscat

Domestic workers deserve to be treated with respect

I write in reference to Nyree McFarlane's article Cleaning up our language: Why we should retire the use of the word 'maid' (April 14).

I agree with Ms McFarlane’s point of view. I believe the word helper or domestic helper is more apt to describe this particular job. Also, if the helper happens to be in our home in the presence of guests, it is only fair to introduce them by their preferred name and not their job title. After all, this is what we would normally do for anyone else.

Randall Mohammed, Dubai
