Hindu trader from Indian Kashmir back in homeland after 29 years

Kashmiri Muslims elcome Kashmiri Pandit (Hindu) Roshan Lal Mawa at his shop in the downtown area of Srinagar, the summer capital of Indian Kashmir, May 2, 2019. EPA-EFE/FAROOQ KHAN

Roshan Lal Mawa stands inside his shop in the downtown area of Srinagar, the summer capital of Indian Kashmir, May 2, 2019. EPA-EFE/FAROOQ KHAN

A Kashmiri Muslim welcomes Kashmiri Pandit (Hindu) Roshan Lal Mawa at his shop in the downtown area of Srinagar, the summer capital of Indian Kashmir, May 2, 2019. EPA-EFE/FAROOQ KHAN

The return of a local Hindu trader to the Kashmir valley – 29 years after he fled the restive region when he was allegedly shot and injured by militants – has made the entire local trade community nostalgic in downtown Srinagar, the summer capital of Indian-administered Kashmir.

Many local Hindus, known as Pandits, left the valley soon after the eruption of an armed struggle against the Indian rule in 1989 that resulted in the killing of dozens of civilians, including some Pandits.

These Pandits often took refuge in Hindu-dominated Jammu – the state's winter capital – and in the nation's capital, New Delhi, before settling there, as a majority of them sold their properties in Kashmir, including their residential houses and agricultural lands.

But a 79-year-old resident of old Srinagar, Roshan Lal Mawa, did not sell his shop in Gada Kocha, a Muslim-majority area where deep anti-India sentiments are prevalent.

Roshan, who has proven himself a successful businessman in Delhi over the last three decades, said he was overwhelmed by the rousing welcome he received from fellow traders in the community upon his return.

In the freshly-painted enclosure, Roshan was garlanded and crowned with a traditional turban by the neighboring shopkeepers on May 1.

"A breeze of homeland is worth all the comforts of life in Delhi," Roshan quietly told EFE. “I missed my birthplace for all these years, but I am happy now because I am back.”

Many businessmen and Roshan’s friends in Gadda Kocha said that they never stopped trading with Roshan.

“He is such a noble soul and an honest businessman,” said Ghulam Muhammad, who sells spices at a nearby market. “I and many others did not stop trading with Roshan, even when he was in Delhi.”

On Oct. 13, 1990, Roshan was shot three times in the abdomen with bullets allegedly fired by militants.

“The horror of the past still haunts me, but I want to overcome it and look forward to a new beginning," Roshan said.

Soon after the attack, Roshan, his wife, his two sons and a daughter packed their bags and moved to New Delhi.

Seeing as his father seemed desperate to return to his motherland three decades later, Roshan's son, Sandeep Mawa, decided to rebuild his shop in Srinagar.

“Last year, we started the reconstruction work on the shop. When the work was done, my father finally decided to return this year,” Sandeep told EFE.

Running a social organization to "bridge the gap between communities,” Sandeep is essentially a medical doctor but not in government service.

He said he had "a good business” and was happy with that.

"I am working for the return of Kashmiri Pandits to their motherland,” Sandeep said. “I am hopeful that the day is not far when everything will be alright in Kashmir."

Almost 30 years later, what motivated Roshan to return?

“Honestly, Delhi never suits a Kashmiri,” he said. “Although I own a huge business in Delhi, I was never able to mingle with the people there.”

While most Kashmiri Pandits left the valley in the early 1990s, 808 families made up of 3,343 people decided not to leave their homeland.

These Pandits who preferred to stay in Kashmir are represented by an organization, Kashmiri Pandit Sangarsh Samiti, headed by a local Pandit, Sanjay Tiko, who questioned the reasons behind Roshan's return.

"Businesspeople have been returning to Kashmir for their individual interests since the late nineties, but they never settled here again," Sanjay said. "If Roshan is sincere in his return home, he must bring his family and live with us.”

“Roshan has, in fact, come here to fulfill the high political ambitions of his son, Sandeep,” he claimed.

"Why (is there) so much noise over Roshan’s return when many businesspeople have returned in the past as well?” Sanjay added. “It is only to gain attention and cash in on the political front.”

Recently, on the recommendations of the state administration, the Indian ministry of home affairs cited the alleged "ethnic cleansing” of Kashmiri Pandits as the main reason for banning separatist outfits active in Kashmir.

However, many locals believe that the Pandit migration from the valley was at the time masterminded by officials in Srinagar and New Delhi.

“The killings of many Pandits cannot be denied, but there are various accounts which reveal that Pandits were escorted out of the valley by the then-administration to launch an onslaught on local Muslims,” Raashid Maqbool, an assistant professor at the Central University of Kashmir, told EFE.

According to state government records released during its last assembly session, 219 Pandits were killed in the Valley between 1989-2004.

At present, there are about 62,000 registered Kashmiri Pandit families living in different parts of India. Around 40,000 of them live in Jammu and 20,000 live in Delhi and its satellite cities. Another 2,000 families live in other parts of the huge South Asian country.

The Himalayan region, whose inhabitants mostly hold deep-rooted anti-India sentiments, is divided between India and Pakistan by the Line of Control, the highest militarized de-facto border.

Ever since 1947, when both the neighboring countries achieved independence from the British Empire, India and Pakistan have fought at least two wars over the disputed region, which they claim in its entirety and where a popular resistance is still ongoing against Indian rule.

sa-njd/dl
