Imran Khan continues tirade against Modi government, says 'India captured by Hindu supremacist ideology'

Pakistan PM Imran Khan | Photo Credit: PTI

Islamabad: Pakistan Prime Minister Imran Khan, who has been venting out his ire against the Narendra Modi-led government since the abrogation of Article 370, on Sunday launched a fresh attack at the Central government in a series of tweets.

Slamming his Indian counterpart Narendra Modi over the Kashmir issue, the Pakistan PM said that India has been captured by a “fascist, racist, Hindu supremacist ideology and leadership”.

“India has been captured, as Germany had been captured by Nazis, by a fascist, racist Hindu Supremacist ideology & leadership,” he wrote on Twitter.

Asserting that RSS ideology is inspired by that of Nazi's, the Pakistan PM tweeted, “One can simply Google to understand the link between the Nazi ideology & ethnic cleansing & genocide ideology of the RSS-BJP Founding Fathers.”

The World must also seriously consider the safety & security of India's nuclear arsenal in the control of the fascist, racist Hindu Supremacist Modi Govt. This is an issue that impacts not just the region but the world. — Imran Khan (@ImranKhanPTI) August 18, 2019

Mounting his attack, Khan said, “Already 4m Indian Muslims face detention camps & cancellation of citizenship. World must take note as this genie is out of the bottle & the doctrine of hate & genocide, with RSS goons on the rampage, will spread unless the international community acts now to stop it.”

He also warned the international community of threat from India's nuclear arsenal, which, according to him, is in the control of the "fascist, and Hindu supremacist Modi Government".

“The World must also seriously consider the safety & security of India's nuclear arsenal in the control of the fascist, racist Hindu Supremacist Modi Govt. This is an issue that impacts not just the region but the world,” he said in another tweet.

Earlier this month, Khan had said that the ideology of the PM Modi-led ruling government will lead to suppression of Muslims in India.

The Pakistan PM also alleged that the "curfew, crackdown and impending genocide of Kashmiris" is an "attempt is to change demography of Kashmir through ethnic cleansing."

“I am afraid this RSS ideology of Hindu Supremacy, like the Nazi Aryan Supremacy, will not stop; instead it will lead to suppression of Muslims in India & eventually lead to targeting of Pakistan. The Hindu Supremacists version of Hitler's Lebensraum,” Khan had said in a tweet.

The curfew, crackdown & impending genocide of Kashmiris in IOK is unfolding exactly acc to RSS ideology inspired by Nazi ideology. Attempt is to change demography of Kashmir through ethnic cleansing. Question is: Will the world watch & appease as they did Hitler at Munich? — Imran Khan (@ImranKhanPTI) August 11, 2019

Ever since Prime Minister Modi-led government has revoked Article 370 and bifurcated J&K into two union territories -- J&K and Ladakh, Pakistan has been approaching several foreign countries and international communities seeking their support and intervention in Kashmir issue. Besides China, no country extended support or agreed to mediate between India and Pakistan on the "bilateral" issue.

Recently, Pakistan had sought United Nations General-Secretary, Antonio Guterres' intervention in the matter, however, he rejected to mediate between New Delhi and Islamabad, citing the Simla Agreement that prohibits third-party intervention in Kashmir issue.
