Justice for Kashmiris means giving them right of self determination

Pakistan’s ambassador to the United States, AsadMajeed Khan, said in an interview to the editorial board of the New York Times that Pakistan could re-deployed troops from the Afghanistan border to the Kashmir frontier, a shift that could complicate American peace talks with the Taliban. He said when the Pakistani Prime Minister Imran Khan met last month with President Trump at the White House, the American leader said he would help mediate between Pakistan and India on Kashmir. ” Trumps offer was a sign of immense goodwill that the people of Kashmir enthusiastically applauded. The Indian government’s alarming announcement last week that it would revoke article 370 of the Indian constitution is a slap in the face of this renewed American commitment to solve one of the worlds most dangerous and intractable conflict. It makes plain to the world the death of India’s arrogant indifference to the regions peace and stability”, he said. “This is why it is more urgent than ever for the United States to do what it can to prevent India from precipitating and other crisis”, the envoy added.

Every year, Independence Day reminds us to ponder on the significance of freedom. The day makes us re- understand the difficult and long struggle for freedom that the Muslims of the subcontinent undertook for the dream of a country with they were free from persecution and oppression. Residing in Pakistan where our constitution grants us the freedom to practice our faith we ponder and re-think of how our elders sacrificed, their movable and immovable precious possessions and their lives for the privilege and satisfaction that comes with the rights of self determination and independence. It is important for us to remember that the fight for freedom is not over yet for some people. The people of Indian occupied Kashmir who have been subjected to oppression and atrocities for over 70 years, are still being deprived of their human rights and essential freedoms. Since 1947, the Kashmiri people have had the right to self-determination clamped down by India, which has consistently increased military forces in Kashmir, making it officially a totalitarian, brutal and a ruthless occupier, which more frequently subjects the occupied people to the use of force, and which has violated all decorum of international law. State terrorism in Kashmir by Modi government cannot deter resolve of the people to continue their struggle for freedom and grant of right of self determination under the United Nations resolution. In the face of Indian criminality, the world community is expected to re-think of measures to promote regional peace and stability and its implications for the international peace and the worth of human values and humanity. Pakistan’s resolve to solve Kashmir dispute is as strong as desire for peace.

It is important that Pakistan essentially aims at resolution of the Kashmir issue, and emphasize India’s glaring violation of UNSC resolutions to argue that it has lost a good faith for Kashmir to be a bilateral issue. The UN’s shortcoming in Kashmir is that it views the issue as an entirely political dispute, rather than a legal and humanitarian issue, one where India has committed several illegal atrocities which demand punitive retribution. At the end of the day Kashmir issue is the issue of “human rights” and “treacherous violation of human rights” by India for over 70 years. The status of Muslim majority Kashmir has been changed by Modi Government to non-issue without a concern for the people who have suffered at the hands of state terrorism and criminality.

It is here that president Trump can make his contribution to stop Indian brutalities for the sake of justice and peace. If there is a war it will be last war for the whole region. India must think of consequences of its war mongering. India will not be safe either

Standing upright against the tyrants is a great service. Speaking truth to the power is a virtue. The only two pressures that could be enduring and may modify Indian attitude are the defiant spirit of valiant Kashmiris and the unflinching support of the people and the state of Pakistan. If outcome of wars could be judged by the economic powers and the comparison of forces, there would have been no military history and no wars of independence. There has to be an integration of diplomatic, political and kinetic aspects in face of contemporary, evolving conflicts to seek resolution and new approaches to problems.

Economic power is simply a myth in case of India where 60% of the people are living without electricity, without adequate sanitary conditions and a large number of them still sleep on foot paths. It is rather surprising that India remains more occupied by war mongering and arms race rather than tackling the issue of abject poverty and human misery and disrespect for human values and humanity in that country. Remember, “reality of Kashmir was neither changed by an illegal piece of paper in 1947 nor will any other do it now or in future. Pakistan has always stood by Kashmiris against Indian hegemonic ambitions, will always do. There can never be a compromise on Kashmir.

Foreign minister Qureshi wrote a letter to the UN Security Council asking it to convene a special meeting to discuss the illegal steps of India of changing the status quo in Kashmir. The move by India blocks the right of state of Jammu and Kashmir to frame its own laws and allows non-residents to buy property there. This deliberate move to change the demographic of Kashmir was not acceptable as it is a conspiracy to turn the Muslim majority of Kashmir into a minority. Protest rallies across Pakistan, Kashmir condemned Indian policies full of violence and hatred against Pakistan. God knows only when India will ever stop Pakistan bashing, killing of innocent people in cross LOC fire, affecting poor villagers in Azad Kashmir and adjoining areas.

UN Security Council takes up Kashmir on Aug 16, 2019, Friday, to deal with the grave situation in Indian occupied Kashmir. China seeks closed-door consultations, Russia does not object. The international community is fully aware now of ethnic cleansing of Muslims as policy of Modi Government in India and Indian occupied Kashmir. All international forums must act to stop mass killings of Muslims. It is here that President Trump can make his contribution to stop Indian brutalities for the sake of justice and peace. If there is a war it will be last war for the whole region. India must think of consequences of its war mongering. India will not be safe either.

August 16, 2019 section of the UN Security Council rejected Indian stance that Kashmir issue was an internal matter for them. Kashmir is a disputed territory and is subject to settlement under United Nations resolution that recognize Kashmiris’ right of self determination and freedom.

Security council urges parties to the dispute to refrain from unilateral steps. China strongly supported call for UNSC meeting. Chinese diplomat representing at the United Nations said Indian unilateral move is “invalid “.

“It is for the first time in 50 years that the world body has reaffirmed that Kashmir is not India’s internal issue” said Dr. Lodhi, Pakistan’s permanent representative to the United Nations. ” Voice of Kashmiris has been heard, they are not alone”. India continues to violate human rights which is the crux of the matter. Kashmiris must get their right of self determination as per United Nations Resolution.

The writer is former Director, National Institute of Public Administration (NIPA) Government of Pakistan
