Imran Khan Does It Again, Terms Assam NRC List As Modi Govt's Ethnic Cleansing Of Muslims

highlights Imran Khan questions Modi govt over Assam NRC.

Khan linked Assam NRC to revocation of Article 370.

The PM terms NRC as Modi Govt's ethnic cleansing of Muslims.

New Delhi:

Pakistan Prime Minister Imran Khan on Friday again interfered in one of India's internal matters, questioning the Narendra Modi-led BJP government over the Assam NRC 2019 final list, published on Saturday morning. Assam, which has been facing an influx of people from Bangladesh since the early 20th century, got the final NRC list at 10 am this morning, excluding names of over 19 lakh applicants.

Khan linked the implementation of the National Register of Citizens (NRC) in Assam with abroagation of Article 370 of the Constitution in early August, alleging that the move is nothing but part of the Modi government's wider policy to target Muslims.

Taking to Twitter, Prime Minister Khan wrote, "Reports in Indian and international media on Modi Govt's ethnic cleansing of Muslims should send alarm bells ringing across the world that the illegal annexation of Kashmir is part of a wider policy to target Muslims", along with a link of an Indian media report, covering Assam NRC.

READ | Pakistan Ready For 'Conditional Bilateral' Talks With India, Says Shah Mehmood Qureshi

The statement comes amid hightened tensions between India and Pakistan, following the Modi government's decision to revoke Article 370, stripping the special status to Jammu and Kashmir and bifurcate the state into two Two Union Territories - Jammu and Kashmir and Ladakh.

READ | India, Pakistan Officials Discuss Technical Aspects Of Kartarpur Corridor

However, this is not the first time that the Pakistan Tehreek-e-Insaf (PTI) leader has criticised the Modi government over its anti-Muslim policies. Early in the month, in a veiled attack at the Rashtriya Swayamsevak Sangh (RSS), the parent organisation of the ruling BJP in India, Khan compared the right wing group with German leader Adolf Hitler.

The prime minister said its theory of Hindu supremacy, which is currently affecting Pakistan, will eventually lead to suppression of Indian Muslims.

"The curfew, crackdown and impending genocide of Kashmiris in IOK is unfolding exactly acc to RSS ideology inspired by Nazi ideology. Attempt is to change demography of Kashmir through ethnic cleansing. Question is: Will the world watch & appease as they did Hitler at Munich?" Khan tweeted.

READ | Pakistan ready for war with India, deploys troops and weapons in PoK near LoC: Reports



"I am afraid this RSS ideology of Hindu Supremacy, like the Nazi Aryan Supremacy, will not stop in IOK; instead it will lead to suppression of Muslims in India & eventually lead to targeting of Pakistan. The Hindu Supremacists version of Hitler's Lebensraum," he wrote in another tweet.

Khan has been consistently attacking India on its decisions on Jammu and Kashmir in the last few weeks. He has also maintained that Pakistan will raise the issue at every international forum, including at the UN General Assembly.

For all the Latest India News, Download News Nation Android and iOS Mobile Apps.
