Sitting, former Assam MLAs flunk NRC test

vinaymishra188@gmail.com

Guwahati, August 31

Some prominent faces of Assam are among the 19 lakh who have also flunked the citizenship test.

Among them are Ananta Kumar Malo, a sitting All India United Democratic Front (AIUDF) MLA from Abhayapuri South constituency, and former AIUDF legislator Ataur Rahman Mazharbhuyan who represented the Katigora constituency in the Assembly between 2006 and 2011. “I and my brother filed the same data. But while the NRC document included my brother’s name, my name was excluded,” said Malo and added, he would soon approach the Foreigners’ Tribunal.

Stating that his is just an example of how people are excluded from the NRC, Malo said, “There are some problems with the system, otherwise how can they exclude my name.” Mazharbhuyan also expressed shock on not finding his, his two daughters and a son’s name in the NRC. “The draft NRC included my entire family, but for me, two daughters and the son. As we received summons, we went to the NRC Seva Kendra and submitted all the relevant documents.”

“We were expecting to see our names in the NRC. Who should I blame to? There is no point blaming anyone but to follow the process laid down to correct the same,” he said and added, they would soon approach the Foreigners’ Tribunals to rectify the mistake.

Authorities on Saturday published the final NRC list, which excluded 19,06,657 and included 3,11,21,004 persons. The government has, however, stated that those excluded from the list would neither be arrested not declared foreigners. The excluded people would have to approach the Foreigners’ Tribunal to prove their citizenship. They can move courts later if not satisfied with the tribunal’s verdict, it said. — PTI

Long fight for identity

1950 Immigrants (Expulsion from Assam) Act comes into force

1951 First Census of Independent India conducted and based on Census, first NRC compiled

1957 Immigrants (Expulsion from Assam) Act repealed

1964-1965 Influx of refugees from East Pakistan

1971 Fresh influx, Bangladesh comes into existence

1979-1985 Assam agitation for detection, disenfranchisement and deportation of foreigners

1983 Massacre at Nellie in Central Assam which claimed 3,000 lives; Illegal Migrants (Determination by Tribunals) Act passed

1985 Assam Accord (stating cut-off date March 25,1971) signed

1997 EC decides to add ‘D’ against names of ‘doubtful’ voters

2005 SC strikes down IMDT Act; Centre, state and AASU decide to update NRC, but no breakthrough

2009 Assam Public Works, an NGO, moved SC praying for deletion of foreigners’s name in electoral rolls

2010 Pilot project starts in Chaygaon, Barpeta to update NRC

2013 SC directs Centre, state to begin the process for updating NRC

2015 NRC updation process begins

2017 On December 31 midnight, the first draft of NRC published

July 30, 2018 Assam Government releases another NRC draft

June 26, 2019 Additional draft exclusion list released

August 31, 2019 Final NRC released

Sonitpur Woman commits suicide

Guwahati: A woman in Sonitpur district on Saturday committed suicide shortly before the final NRC list was released. The incident took place at No 1 Dolabari village. Villagers said the victim, Shayera Begun, jumped in a well in the backyard of her house. “She was tensed about inclusion of her name in the NRC,” they said. But Sonitpur SP said: “The woman was mentally ill. Names of her family members were included in the NRC.” IANS

AIUDF changes stand, thanks SC

Guwahati: In a shift of stand over NRC updation, the AIUDF on Saturday thanked Supreme Court for taking the initiative to ascertain genuine citizens. The foreigners issue in the state has been festering for the last 40 years but no government was willing to resolve it. It was the Supreme Court which took the initiative of NRC updation to ascertain the genuine citizens, AIUDF spokesman and MLA Aminul Islam said. PTI

‘Conduct NRC in Delhi’

"There are close to 15 lakh illegal migrants in the Capital. They should be listed and deported. This is a very precarious situation which needs urgent attention. I will soon meet Home Minister Amit Shah to urge him for conducting the NRC exercise in Delhi." — Manoj Tiwari, BJP MP

‘Botched-up process’

"The final NRC is a fiasco, has exposed all those who tried to gain political mileage out of it. My heart goes out to all those, especially the large number of Bengali-speaking brothers and sisters, who are made to suffer because of this botched-up process. — Mamata Banerjee, TMC Chief
