PM Imran questions conscience of international community on Kashmir atrocities

PM Imran said that today is the 32nd day of the siege of IoJK by Indian forces in Kashmir.

ISLAMABAD (Dunya News) – Prime Minister Imran Khan while expressing disappointment raised questions on the conscience of the international community over atrocities in the occupied Kashmir, “Is the international community’s humanity dead when Muslims are being persecuted?”

PM Imran took to Twitter and asserted, “Today is the 32nd day of the siege of IOJK by the Indian Occupation Forces of the Modi Govt. Under cover of this siege, Indian forces have killed, injured (with pellet guns), [and] abused Kashmiri men, women & children.”

Today is the 32nd day of the siege of IOJK by the Indian Occupation Forces of the Modi Govt. Under cover of this siege, Indian forces have killed, injured (with pellet guns), abused Kashmiri men, women & children. Men have been taken away & thrown into prisons across India. — Imran Khan (@ImranKhanPTI) September 5, 2019

He emphasized on the arrest of innocent Kashmiris whom are being thrown in the jail by the Indian troops, “Men have been taken away & thrown into prisons across India.”

He went on to say, “Hospitals have run out of medical supplies; basic necessities are in short supply but a communication blackout has deprived Kashmiris a voice to the outside world & their families.” “Despite this, tales of horror are finding their way into the international media,” he added.

Hospitals have run out of medical supplies; basic necessities are in short supply but a communication blackout has deprived Kashmiris a voice to the outside world & their families. Despite this, tales of horror are finding their way into the international media. — Imran Khan (@ImranKhanPTI) September 5, 2019

PM Imran lambasted the global community for the Kashmiri genocide expressing, “The world cannot feign ignorance as it did at Munich in 1938. The fascist, Hindu-Supremacist design of the Modi Govt with its ethnic cleansing & genocide of Muslims’ agenda in IOJK, in India itself (Assam) & beyond into AJK is now overt for all the world to see.”


