View: Indian politics forever hostage to status quo, but Modi swims against the tide

Before he became Prime Minister of the United Kingdom, Boris Johnson was among the highest paid columnists in the media. While this testified to his amazing way with words, it was also a source of envy. His media colleagues debunked him for his clever superficiality and lack of depth. Boris, it was said, was always ‘winging it’ — the quaint colloquialism for improvisation. While others slogged, Boris banked on his effortless brilliance.This week, as the British government staggered from one crisis to another, Boris’s penchant for winging it was in focus. The PM, tweeted a media colleague, “is making it up as he goes along, which is precisely what he did as a journalist. He doesn’t have a clue how to govern. His prime ministership is tomorrow’s fish and chip paper.”Writing premature obituaries is always hazardous. The criticism of Boris centres on a belief that he has no convictions, is ruthlessly opportunist and is prone to forever winging it. The unstated implication is that he should not have rocked the boat and played to the Brexit galleries. Instead, he should have been content being a plodder, putting convictions (if any) aside and allowing events to guide the future.Passivity in the face of seemingly intractable problems is a time-honoured approach. P V Narasimha Rao was one of the cleverest and most erudite ‘accidental’ prime ministers of India. In the five years at the helm, he reshaped both foreign policy and the economic orientation of India. But did he mean to? Or, did he merely respond to situations? Would he have thrown his weight behind the dismantling of socialism had India not been confronted with a monumental balance of payments crisis in 1991? Was his pragmatic foreign policy born of conviction or was it a response to Cold War’s end?Naturally there are no black and white answers. However, Rao also acquired a reputation for management by inaction: doing nothing by design. Instinctively, he preferred to let problems fester and take their own course. That was his approach to the Ayodhya problem. It is said that he preferred his afternoon siesta on December 6, 1992, to taking steps to rescue the disputed shrine from the kar sevaks hell bent on demolition.What Rao did was nothing unusual. Traditionally, Indian politicians have been loath to rock the boat, preferring to leave difficult problems alone. Corruption and black money were known to have distorted both the politics and economics of India. Yet well-intentioned leaders chose to shy away from confronting the menace. The transient nature of Article 370 had been recognised as early as 1964 by the political class. But the issue was kept in permanent abeyance because of a fear that it would create hiccups. Not even the ethnic cleansing of Hindus from the Kashmir Valley could unsettle this lazy consensus. Likewise, the reality of illegal immigration into Assam had been flagged by popular movements as early as 1978. But then Assam seemed a long way off.Nor is it a case of only politicians living for the moment. The history of the dispute in Ayodhya is also a tale of judicial procrastination. An issue that should have been resolved by the late-1950s is still awaiting a final judgment by the Supreme Court.There are many reasons why a section of India nurtures a visceral dislike of Prime Minister Narendra Modi . His critics suggest that he is far too abrasive and is not inclined to follow a consensual political route. Reduced to bare essentials, the criticism centres on the fact that Modi is a conviction politician — a leader who is not inclined to swim with the tide, allow events alone to determine his course of action and, in short, celebrate the ‘Hindu’ pace of change because it involves minimum discomfiture. Modi’s approach is managerial: problems are inevitable, but they also need calculated resolution.Modi’s is a style of leadership that involves the least amount of stop-gap improvisation. The crackdown on corruption and black money has involved taking very difficult political decisions, including demonetisation. He could just as easily have settled for softer options. But he chose to address the issue frontally. Likewise, with Jammu and Kashmir. Modi did what many before him knew had to be done but found too daunting and too troublesome. He consciously chose a high-risk approach because anything else would have involved keeping a problem alive.The great charm of winging it is the instant accolades, the short-term gains. Modi obviously believes that there is no point having beliefs if they are purely decorative.
