Jamia Millia crackdown like Jallianwala massacre: CM Uddhav Thackeray

Nagpur: Chief Minister Uddhav Thackeray on Tuesday joined the chorus by the Opposition parties to condemn crackdown on agitating students against the Citizenship Amendment Act and led a blistering attack on the BJP-led government at the Centre.

"There is a situation across the country where the manner in which the police entered the campus in Delhi and students were fired on reminds one of the Jallianwala Bagh tragedy. Are we creating a Jallianwala Bagh-like situation in this country by trying to scare students," Thackeray asked.

ALSO READ Ex-CM dares CM Uddhav Thackeray to waive off all farmer loans

Thackeray said in a country or a state where the youth are angry, there cannot be peace. "The youth are our strength. India will soon be the country with the highest number of youth by 2022. Youth power is a bomb and I request the government not to ignite it," he warned.

On Sunday, the Delhi-based university had virtually turned into a battlefield after police entered the campus and also used force, following protests against the new law.

Thackeray said atmosphere of fear was being created in the minds of the youth of the country. “I feel no country can remain stable where youth are disturbed. I ask the Centre not to destabilize the youth of this country,” he said.

To a question on whether there have been any protests in Maharashtra against the Citizenship Amendment Act and the National Register of Citizens, Thackeray said the state is peaceful so far.

Former chief minister Devendra Fadnavis said equating Jamia University incident with Jallianwala Bagh massacre by Thackeray was a big insult to the martyrs who have sacrificed their life for our nation.

“Entire Nation & Maharashtra wants to know if Uddhav ji agrees with these slogans?’’ he said.

Advertisement

(To receive our E-paper on whatsapp daily, please click here. We permit sharing of the paper's PDF on WhatsApp and other social media platforms.)

Published on: Wednesday, December 18, 2019, 06:56 AM IST
