G20 Summit: Key takeaways from Narendra Modi-Donald Trump talks

Before meeting Prime Minister Narendra Modi in Osaka, the Japanese city and the venue for G20 Summit 2019, US President Donald Trump tweeted a teaser. He demanded from PM Modi to withdraw "unacceptable" high tariffs recently imposed on certain US products.

However, when the two leaders met this morning, they discussed "various aspects of mutual interest". Instead of getting assurance on tariff readjustment, Trump tuned in with Modi to direct the officials to put their heads together and resolve trade related issues that have cropped up in last one year.

After his meeting with Trump, Modi tweeted, "The talks with @POTUS were wide ranging. We discussed ways to leverage the power of technology, improve defence and security ties as well as issues relating to trade. India stands committed to further deepen economic and cultural relations with USA. @realDonaldTrump"

Tariff tantrums

Discussion between Modi and Trump was brief and the post-meet briefing by Indian Foreign Secretary Vijay Gokhale gives an impression that the bullying tactics of the US president didn't work on the Indian prime minister.

The tariff tantrum of Trump began last year when his administration hiked tariffs on import of aluminium and steel from many countries including India and European Union. He followed it up by ending the General System of Preferences (GSP) for certain Indian items such as textiles and jewellery.

In response, India hiked tariffs on 28 items imported from the US. This has somewhat hit Trump directly. The Indian response is likely to hurt farmers producing and exporting apples, almonds and lentils. Trump believes these farmers in US countryside are his supporters and core constituency.

5G and Chinese data supremacy

Chinese technology giant Huawei's ambitious 5G rollout in the US is being stonewalled by the Trump administration, which has accused the company of doing espionage at China's behest. Trump has been vocal about it.

The Trump administration has barred use or installation of Huawei 5G technology equipped devices in critical infrastructure and offices related to security establishment. The US has been lobbying with friendly nations to boycott Huawei 5G rollout in those countries. Japan and Australia have already barred Huawei from rolling out 5G technology there.

India has not yet committed to Trump administration's call for a ban on Huawei plan to rollout 5G in the country. India maintains the decision will be taken considreing its own business and security interests.

PM Modi, Gokhale said, told President Trump that 5G technology is a new area of communication that offers good opportunity for India and the US to collaborate. This means that India has resisted Trump's pressure to toe its line as he scales up trade war with China.

Iran

Iran is another subject that Trump is passionate about. He is playing the old trick of brinkmanship in dealing with Iran. After he came to power, Trump withdrew from the multilateral nuclear agreement with Iran and imposed fresh sanctions on the country.

Situation turned volatile after Iran shot down a US drone. Trump raked up war hysteria and threatened Iran with military action. But later he changed his mind citing chances of inflicting disproportionate collateral damage on Iran.

Trump administration has been pushing the Modi government for stopping oil imports from Iran, which is a key and trusted supplier of crude oil to India. Moreover, India has strategic interests in Iran, where it has invested heavily in Chabahar port. With a hostile Pakistan and trouble-torn Afghanistan, Iran offers an important gateway for India to the central and Asian regions.

In his meeting with Trump, Modi pressed for the need to maintain stability in the gulf region. Nearly 8 lakh Indians work in the region and their presence makes India an important stakeholder in peace there. He also conveyed India's energy concerns if situation remains volatile in gulf region. Gokhale said Trump told Modi that the US is trying its best to ensure stability in the region - a major takeaway for India.

Defence and S-400

Modi and Trump discussed defence ties with the US president stressing that defence deals between the two countries should go forward. But interestingly, Trump did not raise the issue of S-400 missile system that India is buying from Russia.

India's S-400 and other defence deals with Russia have been an irritant for the Trump administration. Under its Countering America's Adversaries Through Sanctions Act (CAATSA), the US imposes sanctions on countries purchasing arms from Russia. India has sought a waiver for its S-400 deal but the request is still pending with the Trump administration.

Trump deciding to give S-400 deal a miss in meeting with Modi may be a signal that his administration is ready to look beyond and focus on India-US bilateral ties instead of hyphenating it with defence deals with Russia. Remarks by Trump ahead of his meeting with Modi might be another indication to this end.

Trump said, "We have become great friends and our countries have never been closer. I can say that with surety. We will work together in many ways including military."

The change

For record, here is what Trump had said before meeting Modi: "I look forward to speaking with Prime Minister Modi about the fact that India, for years having put very high Tariffs against the United States, just recently increased the Tariffs even further. This is unacceptable and the Tariffs must be withdrawn!"

Post meeting, the White House wrote on Twitter, "Meeting just concluded: President @realDonaldTrump and Prime Minister @narendramodi of India shared ideas to reduce America’s trade deficit, enhance defense cooperation, and safeguard peace and stability throughout the Indian Ocean and Pacific region."

Compared to Trump's first tweet, it is a major tone down from his side.
