Doing everything which needs to be done to save children’s life: Ram Vilas Paswan on Encephalitis outbreak

Ram Vilas Paswan | Photo Credit: ANI

New Delhi: Union Minister of Consumer Affairs Food and Public Distribution Ram Vilas Paswan said that the state government, as well as the Centre, is doing everything to tackle the Acute Encephalitis Syndrome (AES) in Muzaffarpur. More than 140 children have died in Bihar’s Muzaffarpur due to Encephalitis outbreak.

Rejecting charges of the opposition and the media that ministers are not visiting hospitals to take stock of the situation the Union Minister said: “If somebody goes there then you call it nautanki, if we don't then you say why didn't you go to see. [We are] Doing whatever is needed to be done along with the Health Minister and CM.”

Meanwhile, the Supreme Court has asked the Centre and the Bihar government to apprise it about the steps taken by them to prevent the recent deaths of children due to acute encephalitis syndrome (AES).

The court’s directive came after a PIL was filed over the outbreak of AES.

AES, a vector-borne disease causes flu-like symptoms leading to high fever, vomiting and in extreme cases, brain dysfunction, seizure, and inflammation of heart and kidney.

Meanwhile, in Assam, six people have died due to Japanese Encephalitis (JE) in Assam's Jorhat district while ten people with similar symptoms have been admitted for treatment at the Jorhat Medical College Hospital.

“Four JE patients with high fever were admitted to the hospital and they died, while two others were brought to the facility when they were already dead,” ANI quoted Joint Director of Health and Family Welfare Dr Amrit Saikia as saying.

The state government has ordered the health department to start spreading insecticides in the JE affected areas of the district such as Nakachari, Borhulla, Tipomiya and Soycotta tea estate.

On the other hand, members of the Indian Youth Congress and Bihar Congress staged a protest near Union Health Minister Harsh Vardhan's residence over the deaths of children and demanded his resignation. Later, they were detained by the police.
