Violence in jail : Kin of deceased, injured protest against minister

editorial@tribune.com

Harshraj Singh

Tribune News Service

Ludhiana, June 28

Kin of the deceased and injured staged protest against Punjab Jail Minister Sukhjinder Singh Randhawa during his visit at the Civil Hospital here on Friday. The inmates’ families were demanding registration of an FIR and action against the jail officials for allegedly firing at the inmates.

The minister had come to meet the injured inmates and policemen admitted to the Civil Hospital. Demanding justice, some of the protesting members also sat in front of the minister’s car.

One inmate was killed and 11 persons —five inmates and six policemen — were injured during violence at the Ludhiana Central Jail on Thursday. The deceased was identified as Ajit Baba, who died after being hit by a bullet. Amanpreet Singh, brother of deceased Ajit Baba, said, “My brother was not throwing stones inside the jail. Despite that the police opened fire on him. My mother had gone to meet him in the jail. We want that the jail officials concerned should be dismissed. A case under Section 302 of the IPC should be registered against them for killing my brother.”

Ajit’s mother and father also demanded justice for them. His mother lied on the floor with Ajit’s childhood photo in hands when the minister was going towards the emergency ward. They refused to give permission to conduct autopsy of Ajit in the morning. But, the post-mortem was conducted without the nod of the family in the evening, sources said.

The family of Ajit Baba said they would not cremate body till the policeman who allegedly opened fire was not booked for murder.

Jail Superintendent Shamsher Singh has stated that inmate Sunny Sood had consumed poison as per report of doctors and he died during treatment at Rajindra Hospital, Patiala. But, the family of Sunny Sood raised many questions over his death.

Renu Sood, sister of Sunny Sood, said, “My brother’s body had turned blue. My brother was brutally beaten and tortured by the jail staff. Anyone can easily see signs of torture on his body. If the policemen claim that my brother had consumed poison, how he got poison inside the jail. They are making excuses to save themselves. The fact is that my brother was brutally thrashed by jail staff. We want justice.”

An inmate Pankaj has received a bullet injury on thigh. His wife, Pooja questioned, “If the police had fired in the air, how could bullets hit inmates? My husband has been badly injured as he received a bullet injury in his thigh. I have no faith in the police. I will move court. The inmates are being tortured inside the jail.” Meanwhile, the Punjab State Human Rights Commission has taken suo motu cognisance of the matter. The commission has called for a report on the issue.

Cops murdered two inmates: Bains

Some workers of the Lok Insaaf Party supported the protest. Simarjeet Singh Bains, LIP chief, said, “The police have murdered two inmates in jail. Sunny Sood was thrashed by policemen and he died inside the jail. The police fired at Ajit, who was not even throwing stones. The Jails Minister should be removed. Those who fired at inmates should be dismissed and FIR should be registered against them.”

Award for jail staff

Jails Minister Sukhjinder Singh Randhawa on Friday visited the Central Jail, Ludhiana. Randhawa met those jail officials who had bravely tried to bring the rowdy jail inmates gone berserk under control. The minister announced the award of Rs 5,000 each for the officials, besides commendation certificates and promotion. He also praised those inmates who cooperated with the jail authorities in bringing the situation under control and said special concessions would be given to such inmates
