BJP, Sena serving private players: Oppn.

Chief Minister Devendra Fadnavis on Monday held a telephonic conversation with Shiv Sena chief Uddhav Thackeray to discuss the ongoing strike by employees of the Brihanmumbai Electric Supply and Transport Undertaking (BEST). The conversation took place after a meeting between representatives of BEST workers’ unions and Chief Secretary D.K. Jain failed to break the deadlock. Mr. Jain heads the committee set up by the State government to look into the demands of striking workers.

While the BJP and the Sena are allies in the coalition government, the Sena holds the Brihanmumbai Municipal Corporation (BMC). The Opposition accused both the parties of serving the interests of private players over the BEST.

Nationalist Congress Party (NCP) chief spokesperson Nawab Malik said the concept of wet leasing of buses is planned to benefit the Sena leaders. “Similar ploy was used by the Sena in the State Transport buses where private buses owned by their leaders are being used on lease basis,” Mr. Malik said.

He said the BJP is planning to hand over the electricity supply arm of the BEST to Adani group. “The BJP is quietly supporting the strike and wants it to extend so that it can facilitate the handing over of the power business of the BEST to Adani group, their dear friend.”

Former Chief Minister and Congress leader Prithviraj Chavan on Monday tweeted that due to the BJP and Sena’s attempts to one-up the other, around 30 lakh commuters are being affected. “It is sad to see the CM puts the responsibility on the municipal administration and the Bombay High Court,” he tweeted.

However, the BJP and the Sena leadership have pointed fingers at the bureaucracy. According to sources, the strike can be withdrawn in no time if the CM, who handles the urban development department, agrees to one demand of the employees: merger of the BEST budget with the BMC budget.

The merger was one of the Sena’s poll promises during the 2017 municipal elections. The proposal for the merger was cleared by the BEST committee and the BMC in 2017.

“The administration has to take a call. It is not about the political leadership in the civic body, but the administration, which works under orders from the State government. Until they get clearance from the State, no decision can be taken,” a Sena leader said.

The leader pointed out that Mr. Fadnavis has not even given a single reaction over the BEST strike. “The BJP knows the Sena can be cornered through the strike. Have you ever seen the CM not speaking about Mumbai’s problems? Why this sudden silence?” he asked.
