Andhra Pradesh: Pregnant woman dies under treatment, furious relatives resort to protest

The family of the deceased said that they wanted justice for her (Representative Image). | Photo Credit: Getty Images

Key Highlights The pregnant woman was admitted to the hospital on June 30 She passed away under treatment on July 1 Family members and relatives staged protest against the doctors

Hyderabad: Medical negligence claimed another life at a private hospital in Kasibugga, Srikakulam in Andhra Pradesh on July 1. The deceased's husband said that his wife died due to the doctor's negligence. Following the incident, the relatives and family members of the deceased went to the hospital and staged protests.

The deceased, B Revati had come to the Siva Durga Vishnupriya Hospital on June 30 for her delivery. The deceased's husband, Naresh said that his wife got admitted to the hospital after she encountered labour pain. Naresh added, "The doctors said that her condition was critical and they cannot say anything about the baby but will save the mother."

While talking to ANI, Naresh said, "However, the doctors neglected her and did not provide any treatment until Monday evening. Revati died only due to the negligent attitude of the doctors. "

The family of the deceased said that they wanted justice for her. The family blamed Dr Gayatri for Revati's death. Contrary to the allegations made by the family, the doctor said that the patient's blood pressure was abnormally high when she was brought to the hospital and that treatment for the same was being administered to her. The accused denied all accusations made by the family and said that they will try to provide better treatment to the patients who get admitted to the hospital.

Also Read: Odisha medical negligence: Furious family stages protests after death of pregnant woman

Hyderabad medical apathy: Wrong medicine administered to over 30 patients

A similar incident of medical negligence came to light from Urban Health Centre, Nampally in May where an opioid was wrongly administered to over 30 infants. Allegedly, an opioid named Tramadol was administered to the toddlers. Following the incident, the infants were shifted to Niloufer Hospital.

Superintendent of Niloufer Hospital, Dr Murali Krishna said that Tramadol was administered to the toddlers instead of Paracetamol. Krishna said that the effects of the opioid last for around 48 hours.

Jharkhand medical negligence: Denied ambulance, woman rushed to hospital on bike

The video of a pregnant woman being rushed to a hospital in Jharkhand came to light on June 28. The 30-year-old woman was taken to the Chandwa Community Health Centre (CHC) on a bike after the hospital denied an ambulance to the family.

The patient's husband alleged that after the hospital cited a lack of ambulances, he was forced to drive around ten kilometres on a bike to get medical assistance for his wife.

When the patient reached the hospital, the doctors there referred her to the Latehar Sadar hospital and provided her with an ambulance. The doctors at the Sadar hospital referred her to the Rajendra Institute of Medical Sciences (RIMS), Ranchi. Contrary to the allegations made by the patient's family, Civil Surgeon Latehar, Dr SP Sharma said," They had asked for an ambulance but didn't wait for it to reach them, brought the woman to the hospital on a motorbike. If you've called for an ambulance then you should wait for it."
