Internet Services Removed After Massive Protests Erupt For 7-Year-Old Girl Kidnap And Rape Case In Jaipur

The Jaipur government has removed internet services in a number of areas of Jaipur after massive protests erupted for a 7-year-old girl who was kidnapped and raped on July 1, 2019.

Preliminary investigations revealed that the 7-year-old girl was playing outside her house in Shashtri Nagar when a man who was riding a motorcycle approached the girl and picked her up by saying he needed to give money to his father.

After some time, the parents of the girl realized that their daughter had gone missing, and this is when they approached the police officers and registered a missing complaint.

Officials said that the 7-year-old girl was found near the Amanishah Canal two hours later.

Officials added that the 7-year-old girl is currently being treated at a local hospital in Jaipur and the doctors have said that the girl is now out of danger.

One of the family members of the girl said that the “rapist” beat the 7-year-old girl with a belt.

The minor also had to get stitches on her head.

Residents of the city went to protest outside the city police station and demanded action against the said rapist.

Vehicles and windows were also smashed during the protests.

So far the Jaipur Police has arrested 16 people for causing damage during the protests.

On June 2, the government of Jaipur decided to stop the internet services in areas that are under the Shashtri Nagar and the Ramganj Area.

Anand Srivastava, the Police Commissioner of Jaipur, said that the residents of the area are spreading rumors through social media.

Commissioner Srivastava added that 14 police teams are currently trying to arrest the said man.

Last month, a 4-year-old girl was kidnapped and raped in the same area.

Residents of the area said that the girl was also kidnapped in a similar manner.

A complaint was registered by the family members of the 4-year-old girl, but until now, no one has been arrested.
