Siliguri locals protest against TMC leader over ‘cut money’; BJP says ‘menace everywhere from birth to death’

Local traders in Siliguri staged protests against TMC Councillor for taking 'cut money' | Photo Credit: ANI

Key Highlights Siliguri local traders protested against TMC leader over 'cut money' BJP MP Locket Chatterjee raised issue of 'cut money' in Parliament WB Chief Mamata Banerjee had asked party leaders to return 'cut money'

Kolkata: Locals in West Bengal have begun agitating against the TMC leadership for their alleged practice of taking ‘cut money’ or illegal commission to facilitate government scheme.

On Wednesday, several traders shut down their shops in Siliguri’s Ghogomali area for an indefinite period as a mark of protest against TMC Councillor Ranjan Shil Sharma who had allegedly taken çut-money’ from them.

The protesters also blocked roads and set fire to tyres in the area while agitating against the TMC councillor of Ward No. 37.

As per reports, in a recent incident in East Burdwan, a Trinamool leader was allegedly dragged out of residence, tied to a tree and thrashed by the locals who demanded that the party leader should return the 'cut money' given by them.

The TMC leader was reportedly released by the locals only after he gave them a written declaration that he would return the illegal commission taken by him in a month's time.

In another incident, locals put up banners and posters in Ranaghat north-west Assembly constituency accusing Trinamool MLA Shankar Singh of raking up crores of rupees in cut money, The New Indian Express reported.

The issue of ‘cut money’ in West Bengal came into limelight last month after TMC supremo and West Bengal Chief Minister Mamata Banerjee urged party leaders to return ‘cut money’ to locals in order to bolster the image of the party in the state as it faces a tough competition from the Bharatiya Janata Party (BJP).

West Bengal: Local traders shut down their shops in Siliguri’s Ghogomali area for indefinite period, in protest of cut-money allegedly taken by Ranjan Shil Sharma, Councillor (Ward No. 37). pic.twitter.com/EKJkAojYTl — ANI (@ANI) July 3, 2019

The BJP made inroads in the state during the general elections in May by winning 18 Lok Sabha seats in West Bengal, only four less than the ruling TMC.

Meanwhile, the ‘cut money’ controversy rocked the Parliament on Tuesday as BJP MP Locket Chatterjee raised the issue in the House and accused the TMC of running the illegal practice for decades and extorting money from citizens. Chatterjee claimed that the menace of ‘cut money’ was everywhere “from birth to death.”

According to reports, the practice of taking ‘cut money’ by TMC legislators was so prevalent in Bengal that they a ‘fixed-rate card’ – ranging from Rs 200 to Rs 25,000 – for taking a commission from citizens for specific government schemes.

Reportedly, TMC leaders would ask for Rs 200 from families who would avail the state government’s Samabyathi scheme, which provides financial aid for the last rites and other expenses.

On the other hand, families availing government scheme to construct homes would have to shell out at least Rs 25,000 as ‘cut money’ to the TMC leader, reports claimed.

Interestingly, the TMC has claimed that only a small percentage of party leaders indulged in the illegal practice and that appropriate action has been taken against them. It accused the BJP of fuelling the public’s anger at the TMC for their own political benefits.


