Rahul Gandhi quits as Congress president, a glance at his political journey

Former Congress president Rahul Gandhi

Key Highlights Rahul Gandhi takes a swipe at BJP and RSS in his letter posted on Twitter Rahul offered to quit after party's defeat in 2019 elections Rahul lost his Amethi seat to BJP's Smriti Irani in 2019 Lok Sabha polls

Posting a four-page letter on Twitter, Rahul Gandhi announced his resignation from the post of Congress president. The former Congress president also took swipe at the Bharatiya Janata Party (BJP) and the RSS in his letter.

While posting the letter, Gandhi wrote, “It is an honour for me to serve the Congress party, whose values and ideals have served as the lifeblood of our beautiful nation. I owe the country and my organisation a debt of tremendous gratitude and love.”

The former Congress president had offered to quit after the party's crushing defeat in the 2019 Lok Sabha elections. The Congress had just managed to secure 52 seats in 543-member Lok Sabha. Gandhi had even lost his Amethi seat to BJP's Smriti Irani. However, he emerged victorious from Wayanad.

Taking responsibility for the party's poor performance in the general elections, Gandhi had decided to quit. He had also asked the Congress Working Committee (CWC) to decide on the next party chief.

The Congress has been going through a crisis as several party leaders have quit from their posts following the party's drubbing. The leaders had resigned in an attempt to give Gandhi a "free hand" to choose new teams.

Earlier, the chief ministers of Congress-ruled states had urged Gandhi to reconsider his decision but the former party president remained unfazed.

As Gandhi has stepped down from the post of party president, let's have a glance at his political journey.

Rahul Gandhi took a plunge in national politics in 2004 when he successfully contested the general election from Uttar Pradesh's Amethi constituency, a seat that was earlier held by his father and mother.

In 2007, he actively campaigned for the Congress in Uttar Pradesh Assembly elections. However, his party got 22 of the 403 Vidhan Sabha seats and 8.53 per cent votes. In the same year, he was appointed as the All India Congress Committee's general secretary. Besides this, he was also chosen to lead the Indian Youth Congress and the National Students Union of India.

In the 2009 Lok Sabha polls, Gandhi retained his Amethi seat, defeating BSP's Asheesh Shukla by a margin of over 3,70,000 votes.

In 2011, he was arrested for turning out in support of agitating farmers in UP's Bhatta Parsaul village. The farmers were demanding more compensation for their land being acquired for a highway project. However, he was later given bail.

Gandhi again campaigned for the party in 2012 Uttar Pradesh Assembly polls, holding almost 200 rallies in almost two months. Despite his rigorous campaign, the Congress came at the fourth spot, winning just 28 of the 403 Assembly seats.

He was appointed as the party's vice-president in 2013.

He led the party's election campaign during the 2014 Lok Sabha polls. Although he managed to retain his Amethi seat, defeating BJP's Smriti Irani by a margin of over one lakh votes, the Congress was reduced to 44 seats from 206 in 2009 in the lower house of Parliament.

In 2017, he was chosen as the Congress president. The Congress under his leadership was reduced to seven seats in the 2017 UP Assembly polls.

In 2018, he led the Congress to victory in three Hindi heartland states – Madhya Pradesh, Rajasthan and Chhattisgarh.

It is to be seen in the future if Gandhi's decision to step down will help in reviving the Congress which has been going through a rough phase.
