More voices join student leaders’ stir against admin

Allahabad: Allahabad University ( AU ) student leaders’ ongoing agitation against the administration’s decision to replace the students’ union with a council has been gaining traction as more voices come forward to extend support.On June 28, the university’s Executive Council approved a proposal to replace the existing students’ union with a student council. The move sparked protests among the student community and they have been demonstrating on campus ever since. On Tuesday, a group of student leaders gheroad the residence of Bharatiya Janata Party (BJP) MP from Phulpur Kesari Devi Patel urging her to intervene. On June 29, a group of students were detained after the a protest took a violent turn.On Wednesday, national president of Indian Youth Congress Keshav Chand Yadav tweeted in support of the students’ protest on Twitter. Yadav wrote that banning the students’ union on campus would close doors to student politics. “Student are the future of the country and their rise in politics is a healthy sign,” the tweet read. Student leaders from Aligrah Muslim University (AMU) too voiced their support for the demand. AMU Students’ Union (AMUSU) secretary Huzaifa Aamir Rashadi said that the police action against the protesting students was a draconian move and was condemnable.“The AMU student fraternity stands with our friends in AU. The universities should know that students won’t tolerate any senseless infringement in functioning of unions in the garb of Lyngdoh committee regulations,” said Rashadi in a post on one of his social media handles.AMUSU vice-president Hamza Sufyan said the decision shows how AU vice-chancellor Prof RL Hangloo intends to silence voices of student leaders. Extending his support to the student leaders, former AUSU president SP Pandey said replacing the union with a council would hamper the prevalence of democratic values on campus. “The unrest is to be blamed on the government, both at Centre and in the state,” said Pandey, who was the AUSU president in 1988.AU student leaders convened a meeting at Union Hall on Wednesday to discuss their future course of action. “Although the district administration and the university have decided to silence any voice which opposes them, but we would continue fighting for democratic values,” said AUSU vice-president Akhilesh Yadav.
