Kerlink and Tata Communications Transformation Services Launch Partnership to Expand LoRaWAN? Network Deployments

Press Release

Kerlink and Tata Communications Transformation Services today announced a partnership to promote and deploy LoRaWAN? IoT networks globally.

Berlin - June 11, 2019, 06:00 p.m. CET - Kerlink (ALKLK - FR0013156007), a specialist and global leader in solutions dedicated to the Internet of Things (IoT), and Tata Communications Transformation Services (TCTS), a partner of choice for the world's leading communication service providers (CSPs) and a wholly owned subsidiary of Tata Communications Limited, today announced a partnership to promote and deploy LoRaWAN® IoT networks globally. The partnership was announced at the LoRa AllianceTM three-day All Members Meeting in Berlin.

Kerlink and TCTS will demonstrate to telecom carriers, start-up IoT connectivity providers, cities, and large multinationals how LoRa technology is one of the most responsive and reliable protocols for IoT connectivity. Kerlink and TCTS will offer easily installed and managed networks that include the full range of smart-city applications for lighting, parking, building, energy and refuse management, as well smart agriculture, metering, and safety and security applications.

"Despite the rapid growth of IoT, many companies and cities are still searching for a private IoT network solution that can be customized for their specific goals and deployed and managed easily," said Madhusudhan Mysore, executive chairman and CEO, Tata Communications Transformation Services. "TCTS and Kerlink will focus on this market and demonstrate - based on extensive telecom experience, multiple IoT use cases in critical applications, and a proven record of deployments around the world - that LoRaWAN technology is the ideal private-network solution for these groups," he added.

Tata Communications, part of the US$100+ billion Tata Group along with TCTS, and Kerlink have deployed LoRaWAN networks in more than 40 Indian communities and cities, touching over 250 million people in total. The nationwide deployment is powered by more than 10,000 Kerlink WirnetTM iBTS Compact stations. Tata Communications' LoRaWAN networks offer an overall availability higher than 99 percent, and Kerlink carrier-grade solutions have demonstrated their robustness and reliability through three monsoon cycles in India.

"There is a compelling story to tell about how Tata Communications and Kerlink customers in India and around the world quickly and easily deployed LoRaWAN -based solutions that deliver multiple IoT benefits to users over long-range, low-power, and bidirectional networks," said Eric Torres, VP & head of Business Operations and Solution Engineering, TCTS. "TCTS and Kerlink have joined forces to share this story and to bring turnkey network consulting and smart applications, sensors, connectivity, and operations management to help cities and companies worldwide deploy IoT solutions that leverage LoRaWAN networks' key capabilities."

"This is an exciting opportunity for Kerlink and TCTS to combine our deep technological know-how and broad on-the-ground experience in designing and deploying reliable telecommunications networks that are tailored to meet our customers' goals," said Robert Clapham, Kerlink's deputy CEO. "Kerlink's high-performance equipment and network design and management offerings, which have been validated in challenging environments around the world, will be key components of this joint offer with TCTS."

TCTS provides business transformation, managed network operations, network outsourcing, and consultancy services to telecommunication companies around the world. In this partnership with Kerlink, the company will provide customers with sensors, integration expertise and the applications needed for its networks. Kerlink will bring WirnetTM iBTS stations for low-power/wide-area (LPWA) connectivity. It will also provide its WanesyTM Management Center for deploying and operating networks with optimised total cost of ownership (TCO) and increased return on investment (ROI). The company has served customer rollouts of LoRaWAN networks in 69 countries.

About Kerlink Group

Kerlink Group is a leading global provider of end-to-end network solutions for the Internet of Things (IoT), serving telecom operators, businesses and public authorities worldwide. Based in Thorigne-Fouillard, France, with a U.S. subsidiary in Chicago, Kerlink is a leading global provider of LoRaWAN® network equipment, software and services. Its growing suite of turnkey IoT services includes network planning, design and operational management that maximizes performance of its market-leading, carrier-grade infrastructure offering. The Group, widely recognized for its IoT expertise, also continually introduces innovative value-added services, such as network-based geolocation, remote end-device management and low-power IoT reference design, which allows its customers to quickly bring to market IoT-ready devices and to imagine innovative business models to monetize their deployments. Most recently, Kerlink introduced an expanded service, solution design, as part of its growing suite of services for companies and smart cities.

In just over 11 years, more than 120,000 Kerlink installations have been deployed in more than 69 countries. Kerlink is supplying more than 330 customers worldwide, including major telcos such as Tata Communications, and service providers such as GrDF and Suez. The company's solutions are enabling major deployments in Europe, South Asia, South America, Japan, and Oceania. Kerlink, a co-founder and board member of the LoRa AllianceTM, has invested more than €16 million in R&D over the past five years. It has been listed on Euronext Growth Paris since May 2016 and entered the 150 fast-growing French SMEs "EnterNext PEA-PME 150" index in 2017. In 2018, it joined the "Tech 40 index", which recognizes the top-performing tech SMEs on Euronext's markets in Amsterdam, Brussels, Lisbon and Paris.

For more information, visit www.kerlink.com or follow us on Twitter @kerlink_news.
