Delhi: Principal calls teacher on pretext of extra class, rapes her; arrested

Allegedly, Singh had been raping the complainant for the past few years (Representative Image). | Photo Credit: Getty Images

Key Highlights The accused, Rakesh Singh was arrested on Thursday, July 4 Singh had started called the complainant to the school on pretext of an extra class Singh allegedly raped the teacher first in 2017

New Delhi: The police arrested the principal of a school on Thursday, July 4, for allegedly raping and threatening a teacher in the school. The accused, Rakesh Singh is a principal of a school situated in Jasola, Delhi. Following the incident, the teacher lodged a complaint at the Sarita Vihar police station.

Delhi Police: A lady teacher of a school in Jasola has lodged a case in Sarita Vihar police station against the principal of the school for allegedly raping her. The principal has been arrested. — ANI (@ANI) July 4, 2019

Allegedly, Singh had been repeatedly raping the complainant for the past few years. The 27-year-old complainant said that the accused had threatened her of uploading an obscene video of her on social media.

The police told ANI, "A complaint was registered with us by the victim in which she alleged that she was being raped and threatened by her school principal for the last few years in the school premises."

Also Read: Students protest outside Mumbai college, demand removal of principal over sexual harassment claims

The police added, "The victim told us that she was first assaulted in 2017 when Singh called her to take extra classes after school hours. The principal took her to his office room and offered her a soft drink laced with sedatives. After she lost her consciousness, Singh raped her and made a video of the incident."

Shimla school principal booked on suspicion of relationship with minor student

In May this year, the principal of a government school in Shimla was arrested over suspicion of having an affair with a student. The parents of the minor alleged that the accused had gifted an expensive mobile phone to the minor.

The accused had also deposited money in the minor's bank account. When the minor's parents asked him about the gift, the accused said that he liked to reward his students. The parents grew suspicious of him and lodged a complaint with the police.

The minor's parents and locals also staged protests near the school and demanded the accused's arrest. Superintendent of Police (SP) Arjit Sen Thakur said that the accused would be booked under relevant sections of the I-T Act and Protection of Children from Sexual Offences (POCSO) Act.

Minor girls sexually assaulted at Sangli hostel for 6 months, principal among four arrested

In a case that came to light from Maharashtra's Sangli in May, minor girls were allegedly sexually harassed in a hostel. The locks of the rooms in the hostel did not work. Allegedly, the man who used to maintain the hostel, Sanjay Kinikar went to one of the rooms and touched a minor inappropriately.

The minor rushed out of the room but the accused followed her and allegedly molested her within the hostel premises. After the minor shared her ordeal with other girls, they also admitted to being sexually harassed by the accused.

The minor then approached the principal and chairperson of the facility but they turned a deaf ear to her. The parents of the minor then approached the Sangli police and lodged a complaint. The police arrested the accused, his wife Varshani Kinikar, hostel principal and chairperson.
