Two stabbed to death in clashes over road rage incident in Dibrugarh

Road rage, rumours spark violence, people from Arunachal Pradesh attacked

DIBRUGARH: Two persons were stabbed to death and three badly injured during a violent clash that took place between two groups over an incident of road rage in Paltan Bazar area of Dibrugarh Town on Wednesday night. Two persons have been arrested in connection with the incident.The incident led to mob vandalism late on Wednesday night, with rumours spreading that people from Arunachal Pradesh were behind the attack, and local residents thereafter entering nearby hotels to attack people from Arunachal Pradesh who were staying there. Around six-seven Arunachal residents were injured in the attacks and many of them had their money and ATM cards stolen from them.Sources said that the incident started at the Assam Medical College Road with a minor altercation between Gunin Chetia, a resident of Laipuli in Tinsukia , and a group of local residents on Wednesday evening.Chetia, who was on his way to the Assam Medical College and Hospital (AMCH) in his Maruti Swift Dzire car (AR-20-4847) with his mother and pregnant wife, was reportedly stopped by the group of local residents who were coming in another car from the opposite direction. The group stopped Chetia and accused him of using high beam lights, which they said were inconveniencing other vehicles.Soon an altercation broke out and the group, comprising six-seven local youths, reportedly thrashed Chetia before letting him go. After leaving his mother and wife at the hospital, Chetia along with one of his friends, Sanjay Ahmed, was returning along the same route at around 10pm when he again saw his attackers at the Paltan Bazar area. Sources said that upon seeing them, both Chetia and Ahmed got down from the car and got into another altercation with the group. The quarrel soon led to a fight, with the group of local residents again beating Chetia and leaving his car damaged.Chetia then launched a vicious attack on the group, leaving five of them bloodied and injured. All of them were rushed to the AMCH, where one of the members of the group, Dipak Mech, was declared dead on arrival. Another member, identified as Ratul Bora, also succumbed to injuries a few hours later.Three other members of the group also suffered serious injuries and are undergoing treatment at AMCH.Later it came to light that all five of them are employees of AMCH. The family members of Mech lodged an FIR at the Diburgarh Police Station, following which Chetia and his friend Ahmed were arrested on Wednesday night.Just after the incident, a rumour began to spread in the area that some persons from neighbouring Arunachal Pradesh were behind the attack. The rumour surfaced as the car being driven by the accused bore an Arunachal Pradesh registration plate. As the news spread, more local residents came out of their houses and vandalized the car. They then started searching for the accused in nearby lodges and hotels.As per reports, several people from Arunachal Pradesh, who have been staying at these hotels and lodges, were roughed up and their vehicles damaged by the mob. Many of them also had cash and ATM cards stolen from them. A resident from Arunachal Pradesh, who was robbed of Rs 60,000 in cash, a mobile phone and ATM card, later lodged an FIR.Dibrugarh deputy commissioner Pallav Gopal Jha and SP Subashini Sankaran visited AMCH to take stock of the situation.“Two persons died and three were injured. The main accused, Gunin Chetia, was arrested within two hours of the incident. The co-accused Sanjay Ahmed was also arrested,” Dibrugarh additional SP Dhruba Bora said. “A rumour had spread that people from Arunachal were behind the incident. This is absolutely false,” he added. On Thursday, all shops and business establishments in the area from Paltan Bazar to the AMCH gate downed their shutters in protest against the incident.
