Thousands Stage Protest in Bhatkal against Mob Lynching across the Country

Thousands Stage Protest in Bhatkal against Mob Lynching across the Country

Bhatkal: Thousands of people on Friday, 5th July, protested in Bhatkal against the killing of Muslim and Dalit youths in mob lynching with the name of cow and theft.

The protest called by Bhatkal’s most influential and powerful NGO Majlise Islah Wa Tanzeem recieved overwelming support from the youth and senior citizens of the taluk.

The protest march against mob lynching was called after the brutal murder of Tabrez Ansari in Jharkand and a spate of attacks on Minorities especially Muslims in various parts of the country.

The march which began from the Eidgah ground passed through the Eidgah road, National Highway 66 and the Main road before culminating at the Public Chabutra near old bus stand, where a memorandum was submitted to the Bhatkal Assistant Commissioner Sajid Mulla which was addressed to the honourable president of India.

The protesters were holding the Indian tricolour and placards with slogans against mob lynching. Some protesters equated mob lynching with terrorism and urged the government to act against the brazen acts. The protesters called the lynching not only a ‘blot’ on secularism but also an organised effort to create fear among Muslims in the country.

Listing out several cases in which Muslims and Dalits have been killed in the last five years in the country, the memorandum said that the government must take stringent action. It should send a clear message that it does not tolerate such incidents and take tough action against those involved in such criminal acts. The memorandum also demanded maintenance of peace and religious harmony in India.

It should be noted that the public gathered in thousands continued to stick on with the protest even though there was heavy rain.

Heavy police security was deployed at every corner of the venue to avoid any untoward incident. The shops and other private establishments remained closed until the protest was over.

On this occasion, Tanzeem’s ex-general secretary Dr Haneef Shabab, Imam and Khateeb of Bhatkal Jamia Masjid Maulana Abdul Aleem Nadvi, Idris Hoode of Udupi and others delivered powerful speeches.

President of Majlis Islah Wa Tanzeem SM Syed Ahmed Parvez led the protest. General Secretary Abdul Raqeeb MJ Nadvi, Convenor Advocate Imran Lanka, Federation president Imtiyaz Udyawar, Vice president Ateequr Rahman Muniri, Rabita Society General secretary Yunus Qazia, Ex-president of Tanzeem Parvez Kashimji and many other personalities were present.
