Karnataka's Coalition Government In Crisis: Top developments

In the lastest development, Karnataka Minister and Independent MLA Nagesh has also resigned from his minister post. Here is a look at the top developments- 1) High drama unfolded in Karnataka when nine Congress MLAs and three of JD(S) went to the Speaker's office to put in their papers on Saturday and later met Governor Vajubhai Vala at Raj Bhavan. Another Congress MLA, Anand Singh, submitted his resignation on July 1. 2) Ten out of total 13 MLAs who have resigned are now camping at a hotel in Mumbai. "We are 10 MLAs are here, totally 13 MLAs had submitted resignation to Speaker and informed the Governor. All 13 of MLAs who have resigned are together and there is no question of us withdrawing our resignation," one among the MLAs who resigned, S T Somashekar, said in Mumbai. 3) Speaking to reporters, flanked by other MLAs who have resigned, he said "three more MLAs- Ramalinga Reddy, Munirathna and Anand Singh will join us tomorrow." 4) Rocked by resignations of 10 of its MLAs, CLP leader Siddaramaiah has convened a meeting Tuesday to discuss the developments and the assembly session, starting from July 12. Watch- 5) Kumaraswamy, who arrived here this evening from the U.S., drove straight to a hotel where a JD(S) MLAs meet is on. Sources said he asked the MLAs to stay united against BJP's "operation" and about ways to save the government. He later held discussions with Congress leaders, including AICC General Secretary Venugopal and Siddaramaiah, they said. 6) Congress leaders meanwhile protest outside the hotel in Mumbai, accusing the BJP of luring away legislators of other parties. Watch | Karnataka Congress cadres protest resignations by rebel MLAs 7) Veteran Congress leader Mallikarjun Kharge charged the BJP with trying to destabilize the "non BJP" elected governments across the country. 8) The ruling coalition, which has 118 MLAs in the 224 member assembly, faces the risk of losing its majority if the resignations are accepted. 9) Meanhwile, BJP state unit chief B S Yeddyurappa said the party was watching the developments and that they were not "sanyasis" to rule out the possibility of forming the government. Ruling out the possibility of any mid-term polls, he said "it has been just 13 months after the assembly election. We will not allow election to happen. "Let them (Congress-JDS) give good administration.If they can't, we are there with strength of 105 MLAs...we will not meet the Governor or go to Delhi for now. we are watching the developments," he added. Also Watch | BJP is attacking on our democracy: Zeeshan Siddique 10) The Congress and JD(S) workers are meanwhile protesting in front of their party offices in Bengaluru, urging the MLAs to withdraw resignation. (With inputs from PTI)

Karnataka Chief Minister H D Kumaraswamy returned from his US trip to Bengaluru on Sunday night and from the airport itself, he started holding a series of meetings with leaders of his party JD(S) and its ally Congress in a bid to save his 13 month old alliance government, hit by resignations of over a dozen Congress-JD(S) MLAs. Meanwhile, the disgruntled MLAs camped in Mumbai on Sunday made it clear they will not withdraw their resignations. The Congress-JD(S) government has plunged into a crisis, with 13 MLAs of the alliance submitting their resignations to the Speaker so far, 12 of them on Saturday. And a day after the resignation of MLAs rocked the coalition, leaders of both parties held day long discussions about the next course of action to save the government. This comes even as opposition BJP said it is keeping a watch on the ongoing developments and indicated that the party was looking at options to form the government.
