Rajasthan: Man immolates self while protesting anti-encroachment drive; condition critical

The man immolated himself to protest against an anti-encroachment drive. | Photo Credit: Times Now

Key Highlights Man immolated self to protest an anti-encroachment on the land where he lives Over 90 per cent of his body has sustained burn injuries; he is in critical condition

Jaipur: A 40-year-old man in Rajasthan's Budha village near Jaipur immolated himself to register his protest during an anti-encroachment drive on the land where he built his home, by forest officials on Sunday. Over 90 per cent of the victim's body has suffered burn injuries and is currently undergoing treatment in a Jaipur hospital. The police have launched an investigation into the matter.

According to reports, Baburao Saini, along with his family, has been long living on a piece of land in Budha village near Jaipur which now falls under government property as per a new survey report, thus making his house an encroachment on public property. When local forest officials tried to carry out an anti-encroachment drive at the disputed land, Saini set himself on fire to register his protest.

The police confirmed that a forest ranger was leading the team of forest department during the drive when Baburao Saini set himself on fire and ran towards the forest officials. The officials ran away from the man on fire and did not provide any help to him. Reportedly, it was his family members who rushed to him and put out the fire on him.

The victim was immediately rushed to a nearby hospital where the doctors confirmed that he has sustained burn injuries over 90 per cent of his body. Given his condition was extremely critical, he was referred to SMS Hospital in Jaipur where he is currently undergoing treatment.

In the video that has gone viral on social media, the man can be seen setting himself on fire and running towards the officials that have come to the disputed land. After the man approached the forest and police officials, they ran away from him instead of helping him. His wife later rushed to him and put out the fire.

Elsewhere in Assam, a 3-year-old child was rescued while her family was about to sacrifice her on Sunday. Reportedly, the family took the decision on the advice of a fake seer, who tried to sacrifice a child after performing naked prayers in their temple.
