Karnataka crisis: Congress-JDS lost majority, CM should resign immediately, says Yeddyurappa

BS Yeddyurappa said the government had lost the confidence and had no moral right to conduct the business of the state.

Karnataka BJP chief BS Yeddyurappa on Monday said that the Congress-JD(S) coalition-led government in the state had lost the majority and so CM HD Kumaraswamy should resign immediately.

Ahead of the BJP legislative party meeting, Yeddyurappa also said that the party will decide on government formation and take appropriate action only after talking to their MLAs.

"Now, we are having BJP legislative party meeting and we are going to take appropriate decision there," Yeddyurappa said. "Let us see what our MLAs have in mind," he added.

BS Yeddyurappa, BJP: Now we are having BJP legislative party meeting & we are going to take appropriate decision there. Tomorrow all our workers will protest, because Congress-JD(S) lost the majority so CM should resign immediately. That is the people's aspiration also. pic.twitter.com/57jOK3hkTh ANI (@ANI) July 8, 2019

Yeddyurappa also said that BJP workers will protest on Tuesday against the government.

"Tomorrow, all our workers will protest, because Congress-JD(S) lost the majority so CM should resign immediately. That is the people's aspiration also," Yeddyurappa said.

He also said that the government had lost the confidence and had no moral right to conduct the business of the state.

"When they lost the confidence, they have no moral right to conduct the business. That is why we are demanding that he (CM) resign immediately," Yeddyurappa said.

BS Yeddyurappa, BJP: When they lost the confidence, they have no moral right to conduct the business. That is why we are demanding that he (CM) resign immediately. https://t.co/Sih9RLnQYn ANI (@ANI) July 8, 2019

As the Karnataka coalition battles yet another crisis with the resignations of 13 MLAs, BJP has steered clear of the blame of orchestrating this crisis.

However, speaking to India Today TV, BS Yeddyurappa also said that he is expecting more MLAs to quit and soon BJP will decide the future course of action.

"My PA Santosh is very much in Bangalore for the last 3-4 days and it is absolutely baseless to say that he is receiving the rebel MLAs at the Mumbai hotel," Yeddyurappa told India Today TV.

Asked if he will become the next chief minister in case the JDS-Congress coalition topples, Yeddyurappa said that is for the BJP leadership to decide.
