Karnataka crisis: Congress brings horse outside Mumbai hotel to protest against horse-trading

As the Karnataka coalition sunk deeper into the ongoing turmoil on Monday, Congress workers started protesting outside the Sofitel Hotel in Mumbai and brought a horse to symbolise the alleged horse-trading happening in the state.

The group of Congress and youth Congress workers gathered outside the Sofitel Hotel shouted slogans, held up banners and protested with a horse even as 10 of the 13 MLAs of JD(S) and Congress continued to remain holed up inside the hotel.

Tight security arrangements were seen near the hotel premises as Congress workers gathered outside to launch a protest.

A similar protest with horses was seen in Bengaluru as well.

FOLLOW LIVE UPDATES ON KARNATAKA CRISIS

Congress workers demanded that they want to meet the MLAs who have submitted their resignations to the Karnataka Speaker. The Speaker is yet to accept the resignations.

Senior Congress leaders Mohammed Arif Naseem Khan, Eknath Gaikwad and Bhai Jagtap led similar protests on Sunday evening as well.

Meanwhile, Karnataka minister and Independent MLA H Nagesh has reached Mumbai, hours after resigning and withdrawing support to the HD Kumaraswamy-led government.

Nagesh reached the luxury hotel in suburban Bandra, where 10 MLAs of the ruling JD(S) and Congress are staying since Saturday.

The protesting Congress workers were not allowed to venture anywhere near the hotel while they kept up their demand of seeing the MLAs. The protesters said they want to know if the MLAs are being held hostage at the hotel or are they staying on their will.

On the other hand, Maharashtra BJP legislator Prasad Lad was seen at the hotel both on Sunday and Monday.

BJP has continued to deny that the party has any role to play in the political crisis in the state. State BJP president BS Yeddyurappa has said the party will be waiting for more MLAs to resign before taking any action.

(With inputs from Saurabh Vaktania)
