Karnataka Govt Crisis: Endgame Nears For Cong-JDS Coalition, 13 Rebel MLAs Shifted To Goa

The JDS-Congress coalition's total strength after Nagesh and Shankar withdrew support is 116 (Congress-78, JD(S)-37 and BSP-1) besides the Speaker. With the support of the two independents, the BJP has 107 MLAs in the 224-member House, where the half-way mark is 113. If the resignations of the 13 MLAs are accepted, the coalition's tally will be reduced to 103. The Speaker also has a vote.

As the Congress-Janata Dal Secular (JDS) coalition government is on its verge if collapsing, all the rebel legislators of the incumbent government, who were camping in a hotel in Mumbai, were shifted to Goa on Monday evening. According to reports, these rebel MLAs were shifted to Goa after angry Congress workers started protesting against them out of the luxury hotel. According to news agency PTI, Of the 13 MLAs, 10--seven of them from the Congress--were holed up in a luxury hotel in Mumbai since Saturday and were joined by H Nagesh, one of the two Independent MLAs and a minister who quit, on Monday. All the legislators were headed to Goa by road. Sources in Mumbai said the legislators were being accompanied by Mohit Bhartiya, president of the Mumbai BJP Yuva Morcha, The group of MLAs are expected to reach Goa, about 600 kms, by Tuesday morning. According to JD(S) sources in Bengaluru, the party MLAs were being taken to a resort on the outskirts of the city. The two Independent MLAs--H Nagesh and R Shankar--who were made ministers less than a month ago in a bid to give stability to the government resigned and extended support to the BJP, as resort politics returned to haunt the crisis-hit coalition. Amid an allegation by Congress leader D K Shivakumar that the BJP 'hijacked' Nagesh, all eyes were on Speaker Ramesh Kumar, who is expected to examine on Tuesday the resignations by the 13 MLAs submitted to him on Saturday that triggered the latest political crisis in the state. The ruling coalition faces the threat of losing its majority if the resignations of the 13 rebel MLAs are accepted.
