Raj Thackeray wants ECI to shun EVMs, go back to ballot paper

In rare appearance in New Delhi MNS chief meets CEC, Sonia Gandhi

The Maharashtra Navnirman Sena (MNS) chief Raj Thackeray met Chief Election Commissioner Sunil Arora in New Delhi on Monday and demanded that Maharashtra Assembly polls, due later this year, be conducted through paper ballots instead of Electronic Voting Machines.

In a rare appearance outside Maharashtra, especially in New Delhi, Mr. Thackeray submitted a letter to Election Commission of India (ECI), demanding the switch back to paper ballot. Later, he termed the meeting a “mere formality”.

“There are doubts in the minds of voters that the votes they cast do not go to their chosen candidates. In such a scenario, the Election Commission should switch back to paper ballots and conduct the Maharashtra polls through it. We strongly feel that the EVMs can be tampered with,” said Mr. Thackeray.

The MNS chief in his letter cited media reports on differences in the tally between the votes cast and votes counted in nearly 220 Lok Sabha constituencies. “This gave rise to suspicion in our minds. The doubts over credibility of the EVMs further increased when the Election Commission removed this data from its website,” he said in the letter to ECI.

He also sought to know how secure are the Public Sector Undertakings — Bharat Electronic Ltd and Electronic Corporation of India — which manufacture the EVMs.

Two weeks back, opposition Nationalist Congress Party (NCP) leader Jayant Patil too had dared Chief Minister Devendra Fadnavis in the Assembly to pass a resolution asking ECI to conduct Assembly polls on ballot paper. Mr. Fadnavis had ridiculed the NCP leader asking him to stop blaming EVMs for their defeat.

Courtesy visit

Meanwhile, Mr. Thackeray also called on UPA chairperson Sonia Gandhi in New Delhi. While no official word was given about the meeting, sources within both parties indicated the possibility of a discussion on the upcoming Assembly polls. However, the MNS later released a statement saying it was only a courtesy visit. This is the second time that any member of the Thackeray clan is meeting a Gandhi family member. Late Bal Thackeray had met late Indira Gandhi in 1976 at Mumbai.

In the recently-held Lok Sabha polls, which MNS did not contest, Mr. Thackeray campaigned extensively across the State against Bharatiya Janata Party (BJP) and had attacked Prime Minister Narendra Modi. Since the general elections results, there has been intense speculation that Mr. Thackeray would join hands with the opposition.

The meeting with Ms. Gandhi is also significant in that it was the local Congress leadership of Maharashtra which had opposed the entry of Mr. Thackeray into their alliance citing his violent protests against north Indians. The meeting with UPA chairperson indicates that the MNS may be welcomed to take on the BJP-Shiv Sena coalition in the State.

Mr. Thackeray had also held a meeting with NCP chief Sharad Pawar recently
