Karnataka crisis: Yeddyurappa says BSP MLA will support BJP

Congress MLAs protesting in front of the Gandhi statue in Vidhan Soudha against 'Operation Kamala'. (Photo:Nagarjun Dwarakanath)

Amidst the ongoing Karnataka crisis with the Janata Dal (Secular)-Congress coalition government in Karnataka fighting to survive, legislative assembly Speaker KR Ramesh Kumar will on Tuesday take the crucial decision on the resignations of 13 rebel MLAs.

The rebel MLAs are expected to meet the Speaker on Tuesday morning. The coalition government is at the verge of losing its majority if the Speaker accepts the resignations of 13 MLAs.

In an attempt to save the wobbly government, all the ministers had quit on Monday to give a free hand to Chief Minister HD Kumaraswamy to placate rebel MLAs while two Independent legislators also withdrew their support.

The action shifted to Goa later on Monday after 13 dissident MLAs -- 10 of the Congress and 3 of the JD (S) -- were moved from Mumbai.

Here are the updates:

10:35 pm: Karnataka chief minister HD Kumaraswamy says he's aware of R Ashok meeting rebel MLAs and is still confident that this meeting will not impact his government.

10:07pm: BJP senior leaders from Karnataka - R Ashok (former deputy chief minster) and KG Bopaiah - at Renaissance Hotel in Mumbai to meet the rebel MLAs.

9:56 pm Senior Congress leader Ghulam Nabi Azad on Tuesday said the country is furious at the way the President at the national level and Governor at the state level are conducting themselves.

Ghulam Nabi Azad after Congress leaders' meeting in Bengaluru: The entire country is anguished at the way the President at the national level & Governor at the state level are conducting themselves. The way democracy is being finished in this country. #Karnataka pic.twitter.com/IJ6Z0LXjZs ANI (@ANI) July 9, 2019

GN Azad: State after state, opposition Govt are being toppled & Govt of India is using Governors for this. From Arunachal Pradesh to Karnataka,Governors side with defectors&help them in coming out of Congress. We appeal to the nation to rise to the occasion to save this democracy https://t.co/bxNd3rK9mx ANI (@ANI) July 9, 2019





9: 39 pm Karnataka Congress leader Zameer Ahmad on Tuesday alleged that the BJP kidnapped Congress party MLAs at a gunpoint.

Karnataka Congress leader Zameer Ahmad: BJP has kidnapped our MLAs and is keeping them at gunpoint. Their mobile phones have been seized. They're not even allowed to talk to their family members. If set free, the MLAs will return to us. 4-5 people each are keeping a watch on them pic.twitter.com/6p8odBQwqe ANI (@ANI) July 9, 2019

9: 03 pm A meeting comprising senior Congress leaders is currently underway in Bengaluru, Karnataka.

Karnataka: A meeting of Congress leaders is underway in Bengaluru. KC Venugopal, Ghulam Nabi Azad, Siddaramaiah, Dinesh Gundu Rao, Mallikarjun Kharge, Eshwar Khandre and Zameer Ahmad among other Congress leaders are present pic.twitter.com/R8cRaJEoF2 ANI (@ANI) July 9, 2019



8:39pm Sources said senior Congress leaders such as Mallikarjun Kharge, Dinesh Gundu Raoand and former Chief Minister Siddaramaiah reached Kumara Krupa guest house to decide the next step in order to save the ruling coalition. While the BJP on Monday reportedly said it will intensify its "Operation Lotus" in the state.

7:53pm The BJP and rebel MLAs of the ruling coalition held another meeting to take further necessary steps. Sources said currently the meeting is on and the party cadres along with rebel MLAs will meet speaker Ramesh Kumar again.

7:25pm: BS Yeddyurappa has expressed confidence that BSP MLA Mahesh, who supported the JDS-Congress coalition government, will now support the BJP. Yeddyurappa said, "He knows everything that is why he is blaming them. He will support us. I haven't spoken to him so far but I will."

6:59pm Sources said Karnataka BJP MLAs will meet Speaker Ramesh Kumar between 1230-3pm tomorrow. While party cadres will stage a protest at 11 am in front of gandhi statue in Vidhan Soudha in Bengaluru

6:47pm Karnataka political crisis: Group of rebel MLAs back in Mumbai

A group of rebel MLAs from the ruling Congress-JD(S) coalition in Karnataka has returned to Mumbai from Satara in western Maharashtra, sources said.

They were earlier on their way to Goa accompanied by a BJP leader, but cut short the trip and returned to the Maharashtra capital.

The rebel MLAs are awaiting legal opinion on how to proceed after the Karnataka Assembly speaker takes a call on their resignations.

(PTI)

6:12 pm 12 rebel MLAs from Karnataka on Tuesday evening returned to Mumbai from Satara in western Maharashtra.

6:06 pm: Congress seeks disqualification of rebel MLAs while one more quits

On its last-ditch to save the ruling coalition government in Karnataka, the Congress party on Tuesday sought the assembly Speaker Ramesh Kumar’s intervention in disqualifying its rebel legislators and accused the BJP of using money power to entice its members after another MLA quit the party.

In a counter offensive after 13 MLAs resigned on Saturday resulting in a major setback for the 13-month-old government, a delegation of Congress leaders met the Speaker and submitted the petition seeking disqualification of the rebel legislators under the anti-defection law.

5:53 pm: Movement of rebel MLAs

Rebel MLAs in Karnataka were supposed to travel to Goa yesterday as some more MLAs were scheduled to travel to Goa from Bengaluru.

As flight was not available from Mumbai so MLAs were taken to Pune. Initially, the plan was to fly to Goa from Pune.

It was due to poor visibility from Pune, the ruling coalition MLAs couldn't be taken to Goa and so they stayed at a club in Pune

All 12 MLAs were then taken to Mumbai by a special flight from Pune.

5:44 pm: Karnataka Chief Minister HD Kumaraswamy on Tuesday asked JD(S) MLAs to be in Bengaluru for at least 4 days.

Sources: Karnataka CM HD Kumaraswamy has suggested JD(S) MLAs to be at Prestige Golfshire Club in Bengaluru for at least 4 days. pic.twitter.com/AwUziLEKt5 ANI (@ANI) July 9, 2019

5:06 pm: BJP MLA Basavaraj Bommai who went to meet Speaker Ramesh Kumar along with other party MLAs said on Tuesday that the Speaker was not there in his chamber when the delegation arrived.

BJP MLA Basavaraj Bommai who went to Vidhan Soudha in Bengaluru to meet the Karnataka Assembly Speaker along with other BJP MLAs: We had come to meet the speaker and he is not there. We have got a message that he is not coming today that is why we are leaving. #Karnataka pic.twitter.com/jtICGMgLWi ANI (@ANI) July 9, 2019

4:50 pm: While sources said Karnataka Speaker Ramesh Kumar on Tuesday refused to meet BJP MLAs .



4:43 pm: Karnataka BJP delegation on Tuesday evening left Speaker Ramesh Kumar’s chamber after they received the message that the Speaker will not be coming today.

4:34 pm: Amid juncture, BJP leader Shobha Karandlaje on Tuesday in a tweet said the resignation of various MLAs of Congress and Janata Dal (Secular) "is a slap on the face of the coalition government".

Resignation spree is a slap on d face of the coalition govt, infact is exposing the pathetic governance of @hd_kumaraswamy.



Resigned MLAs clarified, they are upset due to the lack of developmental initiatives from the coalition.



Blaming @BJP4Karnataka is a sign of desperation! https://t.co/Z6hnsju2k0 Shobha Karandlaje (@ShobhaBJP) July 9, 2019

4:16 pm: While the political crisis of Karnataka was echoed in the Rajya Sabha on Tuesday as Congress cadres raised slogans, leading to adjournment of proceedings for the day. Protest was raised by members of Congress party, TMC, CPI and CPIM.

4:05 pm: As the Karnataka political crisis entered its fourth day, state BJP MLAs arrived into Speaker Ramesh Kumar's office. However, the Speaker was not present in the chamber. Sources said he will come back after lunch.

2.48 pm: Speaker says resignations not in proper order

Karnataka Assembly Speaker KR Ramesh Kumar:Have written to Governor that none of the rebel MLAs have met me. He has expressed confidence that I'll uphold constitutional norms. Out of 13 resignations, 8 are not according to law. I've given them time to present themselves before me pic.twitter.com/KSNInlGwBX ANI (@ANI) July 9, 2019

2.11 pm: Karnataka CM HD Kumaraswamy reaches Prestige Golfshire Club, Nandi hills road in Devanahalli, where Janata Dal (Secular) MLAs are staying.

2.04 pm: Won't take back resignation: Rebel Congress MLA Somshekhar

We will not take back our resignation. We didn't get good governance in this coalition. MLAs will meet and decide on the future course of action. In a day or two, we will meet the Speaker regarding our resignation.

1.31 pm: Will return after 2 days, says JD(S) MLA from Mumbai

JD(S) leader Narayan Gowda in Mumbai: We have resigned from MLA post due to lack of development in the state.

JDS leader Narayan Gowda, in Mumbai: We've resigned from MLA post due to lack of development in the state. Karnataka CM travelled abroad without consultation with MLAs, no work was progressing in the state. We will stay here for 2 days and then we will return. pic.twitter.com/oV3zGhNkpa ANI (@ANI) July 9, 2019

1.12 pm: Members of Youth Congress stage protest over the political situation in Karnataka.

Delhi: Members of Youth Congress stage protest over the political situation in #Karnataka . pic.twitter.com/FfmcIOiwVV ANI (@ANI) July 9, 2019

1.11 pm: Father upset, says rebel MLA Ramalinga Reddy's daughter Soumya Reddy

After attending the CLP, daughter of rebel MLA Ramalinga Reddy, Soumya Reddy said her father was very upset. He is hurt and everyone knows the reason because of which my father tendered his resignation, she told India Today.

1.03 pm: Siddaramaiah reaches Speaker's office to submit a petition to disqualify the rebel MLAs.

12.56 pm: Congress seeks disqualification of rebel MLAs.

Siddaramaiah, Congress: We are also requesting the Speaker to take legal action under the anti defection law. We are requesting him in our letter to not only disqualify them but also bar them from contesting election for 6 years. #Karnataka https://t.co/kgadbFDG68 ANI (@ANI) July 9, 2019

12.45 pm: Sonia Gandhi sends Ghulam Nabi Azad to Bengaluru to manage Karnataka crisis.

12.30 pm: Suspended Congress MLA Roshan Baig has tendered his resignation.

12.27 pm: Rajya Sabha adjourned till 2 PM amid uproar by Congress members over developments in Karnataka.

12.23 pm: Siddaramaiah requested the MLAs to come back and withdraw their resignations. "Party has taken a firm stand to tell the Speaker to disqualify them," he said after the CLP meet.

12.20 pm: Addressing a press conference after the CLP meet, Siddaramaiah said, "We'll make a petition before Speaker seeking disqualification of members who are trying to resign as members of the assembly. According to us it is anti-party activity. They are doing it at the behest of BJP. They are trapped."

12.13 pm: Siddaramaih warns rebel MLAs of legal action unde rthe anti-defection law. Article 164 (1B) of the Constitution allows disqualification of legislators on grounds of defection.

12.09 pm: Congress leader Siddaramaiah addresses press conference after CLP meet, blames the BJP for crisis.

11.57 am: Congress legislature party meet over, former CM Siddaramaiah claims all party MLAs, barring 10 rebels, attended the CLP.

11.42 am: Sources say, Karanatak Speaker ramesh Kumar is currently going through resignation along with assembly staff. MLAs yet to meet the speaker.

11.38 am: BJP MLA says his party to decide future course of action based on Speaker's decision on 14 resignations. The BJP legislature party meet to be held in the evening. The BJP MLA, however, refused to comment on the Speaker's decision to meet rebel MLAs personally before deciding on resignations.

BJP MLA also refuted allegations that his party was holding 10 rebel MLAs in Mumbai. "Do u have any proof? Can we actually hold them hostage?"

11.36 am: Congress leaders who skipped the CLP meet: Ramalinga Reddy, Anjali Nimbalkar, S Ramappa, Roshan Baig.

MLAs who have taken permission not to attend CLP

MTB Nagaraju, TD Raje Gowda, Sudhakar, Kaneez Fathima, E Tukaram

11.20 am: Speaker Ramesh Kumar has said he hasn't received the resignations of the rebel MLAs. "I will look into it. I have to treat the resignations individually, not as a group. If anyone wants an appointment, they have to get it through my office. If anyone proves that the resignation was under duress, it will not be accepted," the Speaker said.

11.07 am: Congress blames BJP for Karnataka crisis

DK Shivakumar, Congress: Mr Rajnath Singh is telling that 'we are nowhere bothered, we are not interested, we don't know about this' (political situation in Karnataka). BS Yeddyurappa is also saying the same, but he is sending his PA to pick up all our Ministers. #Karnataka pic.twitter.com/WEhaap5Lrx ANI (@ANI) July 9, 2019

10.59 am: Congress leader MTB Nagaraj skips Congress CLP meet due to ill health.

10.49 am: Karnataka Congress President Dinesh Gundu Rao: Confident that the government will survive.

Karnataka Congress President Dinesh Gundu Rao: I am confident that the govt will survive & govt will stay. That I am confident about. #Karnataka pic.twitter.com/NipVEACmUj ANI (@ANI) July 9, 2019

10.48 am: JD (S) MLA spotted in Powai

10.46 am: Congress MLA Anjali Nimbalkar skips Congress CLP meet

10.44 am: Congress's CLP meeting underway in Bengaluru

Karnataka: Congress's CLP meeting underway at Vidhana Soudha in Bengaluru. pic.twitter.com/6pYHnTMCZV ANI (@ANI) July 9, 2019

10.42 am: Sonia Gandhi has called a meeting of Lok Sabha MPs of the Congress in Parliament. The meeting is underway.

10.39 am: Our strength is more than Congress-JD (S) MLAs: BJP leader

Shobha Karandlaje, BJP: Now our strength is more than Congress-JD(S) MLAs. We are almost 107, they have fallen to 103. I think Governor can take the decision to call BJP to form the govt. #Karnataka pic.twitter.com/2ySJk32M8n ANI (@ANI) July 9, 2019

10.32 am: Speaker says will act as per law: On assessing of resignations of the rebel MLAs, Karnataka Speaker Ramesh Kumar has said he will act as per law and uphold the Constitution. The Speaker in on his way to Vidhan Soudha.

10.13 am: Rebel MLA Ramalinga Reddy's daughter at CLP meet: MLA Soumya Reddy, daughter of rebel MLA Ramalinga Reddy, is attending the Congress Legislative Party meeting.

10.06 am: Indian Youth Congress to protest against alleged horse trading by the BJP in Karnataka. The protest will be held outside the Parliament.

9.58 am: Congress leaders arrive for CLP meet

Karnataka: Siddaramaiah, Priyank Kharge and other Congress leaders arrive for Congress Legislative Party meeting at Vidhana Soudha in Bengaluru. pic.twitter.com/iLkjccXWQk ANI (@ANI) July 9, 2019

9.55 am: Congress MPs Adhir Ranjan Chowdhury and K Suresh have given adjournment motion notice in Lok Sabha over political situation in Karnataka.

Congress MPs Adhir Ranjan Chowdhury and K Suresh have given adjournment motion notice in Lok Sabha over political situation in Karnataka. pic.twitter.com/VqihN37z56 ANI (@ANI) July 9, 2019

9.50 am: D K Shivakumar is back in Bangalore. He is on his way to Vidhan Soudha

9.15 am: Karnataka CM HD Kumaraswamy meets H D Deve Gowda at his house.

9.01 am: BJP leaders arrive at BS Yeddyurappa's residence.

Bengaluru: BJP leaders Murugesh Nirani, Umesh Katti, JC Madhuswamy and K Ratna Prabha arrive at BS Yeddyurappa's residence. #Karnataka pic.twitter.com/Ap8Yt0KZim ANI (@ANI) July 9, 2019

8.40 am: Congress petitions Speaker not to accept resignations of 13 MLAs

Karnataka Congress' legal department has petitioned the Speaker, requesting him not to accept resignations of 13 Congress-JD(S) legislators, alleging that rules have not been followed during its submission.

8.32 am: Congress MLAs had planned to shift to Pune. Later, they changed the destination to Goa. But they are now staying back at an undisclosed location in Mumbai.

(ANI)

8.26 am: BJP demands Kumaraswamy’s resignation: The BJP has demanded immediate resignation of Kumaraswamy, saying his government was in minority.

8.13 am: Don’t worry, says Kumaraswamy

CM Kumaraswamy, who returned from his 10-day long US trip Sunday, put up a brave face, saying he was not afraid of the developments. "The government will survive," he said, alleging that the current situation is the work of the BJP high command.

Kumaraswamy told reporters he had "no fear" about the happenings and was concentrating on fulfilling his responsibilities. He evaded a direct answer to a question about the resignation of the 13 MLAs and merely said "Let's see".

Chief Minister HD Kumaraswamy met Karnataka Congress in-charge, KC Venugopal in Bengaluru on late Monday night.

8.11 am: Speaker to decide on MLAs’ resignations

All eyes are on Speaker Ramesh Kumar, who is expected to examine on Tuesday the resignations by the 13 MLAs submitted to him on Saturday that triggered the political crisis in the state. The ruling coalition faces the threat of losing its majority if the resignations of the 13 rebel MLAs are accepted.

The JD(S)-Congress coalition's total strength after Nagesh and Shankar withdrew support is 116 (Congress-78, JD(S)-37 and BSP-1) besides the Speaker. With the support of the two independents, the BJP has 107 MLAs in the 224-member House, where the half-way mark is 113. If the resignations of the 13 MLAs are accepted, the coalition's tally will be reduced to 103. The Speaker also has a vote.

8.10 am: All that has happened till now: JD(S)-Congress ministers quit, rebel MLAs moved to Goa

All the JD(S)-Congress ministers quit on Monday to give a free hand to Chief Minister H D Kumaraswamy to reshuffle his Cabinet to include rebel MLAs while two Independent legislators also withdrew their support.

There was no immediate word from the rebel camp on the move to reshuffle the Cabinet in a bid to save the 13-month-old government.

Of the 13 MLAs, 10--seven of them from the Congress--were holed up in a luxury hotel in Mumbai since Saturday and were joined by H Nagesh, one of the two Independent MLAs and a minister who quit, on Monday. All the legislators later left for Goa.

The two Independent MLAs--H Nagesh and R Shankar--who were made ministers less than a month ago in a bid to give stability to the government resigned and extended support to the BJP, as resort politics returned to haunt the crisis-hit coalition.

NATAKA IN KARNATAKA

A political crisis erupted in Karnataka after nine Congress and three JD(S) MLAs tendered their resignations. On Monday, Independent MLAs Nagesh and Shankar also withdrew their support, leaving the coalition government in deep crisis.

All 21 ministers of the Congress resigned to enable a reshuffle of the Cabinet and make way for the disgruntled legislators, in an apparent fire fighting exercise. JD(S) followed suit later with nine of its ministers resigning after Kumaraswamy met Congress leaders.

With the support of two independent MLAs, the BJP has 107 seats in the 224-member House. The party needs to cross 113-majority mark in order to form the government.

With clouds of uncertainty looming over the JD(S)-Congress coalition government, the BJP has called for state-wide protest demanding the resignation of Chief Minister HD Kumaraswamy.

BJP has, meanwhile, denied any role in the political turmoil in Karnataka. Defence Minister Rajnath Singh told Lok Sabha on Monday that whatever was happening in Karnataka had no relation with BJP.

READ | Karnataka govt crisis deepens as 2 more MLAs quit, 30 ministers resign: All you need to know

READ | Will wait for more MLAs to resign, says Yeddyurappa

READ | Why Congress-JDS MLAs are jumping ship

WATCH | Karnataka political row intensifies as rebel MLAs leave for Goa
