Rane urged me to save his son in assault case: Chandrakant Patil

Senior Bharatiya Janata Party (BJP) leader and Pune guardian minister Chandrakant Patil, in a video that surfaced on Monday, has claimed Rajya Sabha Member of Parliament (MP) Narayan Rane had urged him to “save” his son, Member of Legislative Assembly (MLA) Nitesh Rane, after the July 4 deputy engineer assault case.



Kankavli MLA Nitesh was arrested after he poured mud on National Highwaya Authority of India (NHAI) deputy engineer Prakash Shedekar, while protesting against potholes and slush on the congested Mumbai-Goa highway.



Patil had visited Shedekar’s residence in Pune on Friday and made the claim while speaking to the latter’s family. A video of the visit and Patil’s claim surfaced on social media on Monday.



In the clip, Patil is heard telling Shedekar’s family that he had asked the local superintendent of police and collector to slap attempt to murder charge on Nitesh.



“After the incident, I immediately called up SP and collector and asked to invoke attempt to murder section in the case... (Narayan) Rane then urged me to save his son, but I asked him what kind of behaviour (of Nitesh) this was,” Patil is heard saying in the clip.



Patil is also heard telling the family that Shedekar had been provided police protection.



Nitesh Rane was charged under section 353 (assault or criminal force to deter public servant from discharge of his duty) among others under the Indian Penal Code (IPC) and the Prevention of Damage to Public Property Act, based on the complaint by Shedekar. He was sent to police custody till July 9.



Speaking later in Baramati on Monday about his statement in the clip, Patil said that the mud-pouring incident had affected the morale of officials and it was necessary to initiate action in the case.



Incidentally, after the video of the assault surfaced, the senior Rane apologised for his son’s exploits. “I apologise for my son’s act of pouring mud on a government official. The protest (against poor condition of the highway) was for the local people,” he had said on July 4.


