Finally Nehru’s folly revoked in Jammu and Kashmir

Freelance journalist Ashali Varma has authored the biography of her father late Lt. Gen. PS Bhagat — ‘The Victoria Cross: A Love Story’. She was executive producer with the International Commentary Service Inc, New York in 1990. She was the executive publisher of The Earth Times, New York (1992- 98). She has also worked as the editor of Choices Magazine, United Nations Development Programme. She writes on various issues including human rights, population and sustainable development. LESS ... MORE

Finally, after decades, what Prime Minister Nehru gave to Sheikh Abdullah has been revoked. It took almost seven decades to do this and endless blood and treasure for the Government of India. Thousands of lives were lost and generations of Kashmiri Pundits were ethnically cleansed.

This was all due to Sheikh Abdullah and his demands that Nehru gave into Article 370 was a farce at best as no other state that acceded to India had demanded this. Abdullah wanted the article because he wanted, eventually a separate Muslim province with its own non secular Muslim constitution and he as the Prime Minister. The minorities were looked down upon and unlike other states had no special special reservations. Elections could be rigged and there was no accountability to the Centre.

This gave rise to the political parties in J&K that did not care for the people but lined their pockets and there was no accountability as according to their own constitution they were not secular and had nothing to do with the Indian constitution apart from defence and foreign policy, mainly.

Article 35A was introduced later by Sheik Abdullah with Nehru’s consent where no one before 1944 was allowed citizenship in Kashmir, even though by 1947 lakhs of Hindus, Sikhs and others were thrown out of PoK after 1947 but could not be recognised as citizens of J& K. Article 35A came not through Parliament but through a presidential decree, which was forced on Nehru by Abdullah.

Then in the early 1990s, four lakh Kashmiri Pundits were ethnically cleansed from the valley while Farooq Abdullah, at best a playboy, ran away to London, allowing the ethnic cleansing to happen under the Centre’s Home Minister, father of Mehbooba Mufti.

This is old news but news that should matter to every Indian. The original constitution did not have any special status for Kashmir but this was pushed in under duress and thank God that even at that time our constitution makers said it could not be done and put the clause of Temporary and Provisional into Article 370.

The ‘temporary’ clause lasted for almost 70 years, while the Kashmir valley, which was considered so special that the Centre spent more than 20 times more on every Kashmiri per capita than in Uttar Pradesh yet there was nothing to show for it as the there was no accountability for the political parties in the valley. They siphoned the money that should have gone to the people. They were in sync with Pakistan to pay Kashmiri youth to stone pelt at ?500 a day on security forces, all while they were sending their own children abroad to study.

And Kashmir simmered and simmered while the Hurriyat faction and the politicians made money to send their own out of the valley and promote dissent and destruction in J&K .

Today, finally I am proud to say that the Central Government has finally taken a stand that will not only be good for J&K but for India.

PAKISTAN will no longer be able to kill our brave hearts who have defended our country so valiantly because their terror proxies will not be able to do to business as usual anymore. Now our security services will be free to take out our enemies within and those who try and spread dissent from outside.

Finally we can look forward to a J&K where all will be welcome as they are in the rest of India and businesses and jobs will flourish in a climate of safety and most of all accountability where every rupee spent will be for the people.

Facebook Twitter Linkedin Email Disclaimer Views expressed above are the author's own.
