Pakistan: Imran Khan forms committee to recommend responses to developments in Kashmir

WEB DESK

PAKSITAN Prime Minister Imran Khan Tuesday formed a seven-member committee to recommend legal, political, and diplomatic responses to developments in the India’s Jammu and Kashmir, a notification read.

According to the notification, the special team would comprise Foreign Minister Shah Mehmood Qureshi, Attorney-General of Pakistan, Anwar Mansoor Khan, Foreign Secretary Sohail Mahmood, and the PM’s special envoy, Ahmed Bilal Sufi, as well as the director-general of the Inter-Services Intelligence (ISI), Military Operations, and the Inter-Services Public Relations (ISPR).

PM Imran Khan, while addressing a joint session of the Parliament earlier in the day, called on the international community to act against the Bhartiya Janata Party’s (BJP) bigoted politics.

“They (BJP) have a racist ideology. In Kashmir, they have acted according to their ideology, against their constitution, Supreme Court verdict, and United Nations resolutions.”

The premier informed the Parliament that revoking Article 370 was part of the BJP’s election manifesto and that their forefathers were from the Rashtriya Swayamsevak Sangh (RSS). He stressed that the Kashmir struggle would intensify after ‘India’s illegal’ move.

The BJP “do not consider Kashmiris as their equals. They will try to crush them which will lead to a reaction which can be a Pulwama like incident.

“They will blame us [Pakistan] for this”, he said.

The prime minister feared that there would be ethnic cleansing in Kashmir. “I kept on telling [the BJP] after Pulwama that two nuclear-armed neighbours cannot take such risks and we should resolve our problems through dialogue.”

PM Imran Khan warned of a conventional war between Pakistan and India in light of another Pulwama-like situation, which could arise if the situation in Kashmir kept on deteriorating. “This will be a war that no one will win and the implications will be global,” he noted.
