World can see India's violation of international laws: embattled Imran Khan makes fresh bid to attack Modi over Kashmir

Islamabad: In a fresh attack on New Delhi even after being rebuked by several countries, an embattled Pakistan Prime Minister Imran Khan said India's violation of international laws in Jammu and Kashmir is there for the world to see.

Trying to paint a present picture of Kashmir after the abrogation of Article 370, Khan tweeted, "Today is the 32nd day of the siege of IOJK by the Indian Occupation Forces of the Modi Govt. Under cover of this siege, Indian forces have killed, injured (with pellet guns), abused Kashmiri men, women & children. Men have been taken away & thrown into prisons across India."

Today is the 32nd day of the siege of IOJK by the Indian Occupation Forces of the Modi Govt. Under cover of this siege, Indian forces have killed, injured (with pellet guns), abused Kashmiri men, women & children. Men have been taken away & thrown into prisons across India. — Imran Khan (@ImranKhanPTI) September 5, 2019

"Hospitals have run out of medical supplies; basic necessities are in short supply but a communication blackout has deprived Kashmiris a voice to the outside world & their families. Despite this, tales of horror are finding their way into the international media."

Hospitals have run out of medical supplies; basic necessities are in short supply but a communication blackout has deprived Kashmiris a voice to the outside world & their families. Despite this, tales of horror are finding their way into the international media. — Imran Khan (@ImranKhanPTI) September 5, 2019

Just days after a Sikh girl in Pakistan was allegedly abducted, converted and married to a Muslim man, Khan, facing the ire of Sikh communities worldwide, raised concern about the violation of humanitarian rights in India and said, "India's violation of all international laws including humanitarian laws is there for the world to see. So why is the world silent? Is the international community's humanity dead when Muslims are being persecuted? What message is being sent to the 1.3 bn Muslims across the world?"

India's violation of all international laws including humanitarian laws is there for the world to see. So why is the world silent? Is the international community's humanity dead when Muslims are being persecuted? What message is being sent to the 1.3 bn Muslims across the world? — Imran Khan (@ImranKhanPTI) September 5, 2019

Accusing the Hindu nationalist Bharatiya Janata Party (BJP) of doing ethnic cleansing targeting Muslims, the Pakistan Prime Minister said, "The world cannot feign ignorance as it did at Munich in 1938. The fascist, Hindu-Supremacist design of the Modi Govt with its ethnic cleansing & genocide of Muslims' agenda in IOJK, in India itself (Assam) & beyond into AJK is now overt for all the world to see."

The world cannot feign ignorance as it did at Munich in 1938. The fascist, Hindu-Supremacist design of the Modi Govt with its ethnic cleansing & genocide of Muslims' agenda in IOJK, in India itself (Assam) & beyond into AJK is now overt for all the world to see. — Imran Khan (@ImranKhanPTI) September 5, 2019

The bilateral relationship between the two nations started deteriorating first this year after February 14 Pulwama terror attack which killed at least 40 Indian paramilitary personnel.

Following the attack, which was carried out by Pakistan-based militant organisation Jaish-e-Mohammad (JeM), India responded with an airstrike in Balakote along the Line of Control (LoC).

After India scrapped Article 370 to withdraw Jammu and Kashmir's special status on August 5, Pakistan came out with a sharp criticism of New Delhi. However, the Narendra Modi government maintained Kashmir is India's internal matter and it is a bilateral issue with Pakistan where no third party mediation is required.
